 
 
 
Published by: 
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering (CEE) 
Shahjalal University of Science and Technology (SUST) 
Sylhet-3114, Bangladesh. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
March 2012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ISBN: 978-984-33-4624-7 (Proceedings) 
ISBN: 978-984-33-4625-4 (CD-Rom) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Copyright © 2012 by the Publisher. All rights are reserved. No part of this publication 
can be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted, in any form or by any 
means – graphic, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without 
prior permission of the Publisher. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Book Design and Composition: Publication Committee, ICETCESD-2012 
 
 iii 
PREFACE 
 
 
In the state of affairs of horrible and deteriorated scenario, natural resources being contaminated, 
besmirched, distressed, disturbed, disrupted, despoiled, tainted, defamed, deteriorated, polluted, 
ruined, tarnished and infected by disorganized, jumbled, inequitable, unwarranted, uncalled-for 
and hit and miss activities of mankind merged with the non-synchronization of the nature, erratic 
deterioration, unlikely diminution, uncontrollable transformation, non-restricted urbanization, 
non-conformity of technical advancement by leaps and bounds beyond the equilibrium not 
coping with the as usual natural systems without keeping in mind the need of future generation 
for their survival and subsistence causes relentless environmental decay and culprit 
contamination by the unplanned and unintentional urbanization and developing infrastructure in 
unsustainable way. To the cross-road of the development activities and man-made machinations, 
entire world is triggering such deteriorated tracks incessantly. In this context, appropriate 
initiatives should be taken into consideration to evaluate the worldwide environmental situation 
followed by the review of regional and global efforts with the proper recommendations to save 
the nature, nature entities and natural resources. As the succession of such initiatives, 
ICETCESD 2011, International Conference on Environmental Technology and Construction 
Engineering for Sustainable Development – was organized at Sylhet by Civil and Environmental 
Engineering Department of Shahjalal University of Science and Technology (SUST), 
Bangladesh for the first time not only in Bangladesh but also in the South Asia Sub-continent of 
Continental Asia that gave the opportunities to exchange the views and experiences of the 
academicians, researchers, engineers, specialists, experts, professionals as well as the learners at 
international level from home and abroad and to understand the environment technology and 
construction engineering as a whole essential in the field of infrastructure development leading 
to sustainable development and opened the eyes how a system can be made effective within 
limited resources and constraints leading to sustainable improvement. As the follow-up of such 
success ICETCESD 2012, Second International Conference on Environmental Technology and 
Construction Engineering for Sustainable Development – is being organized at Sylhet with the 
same objectives to build up environment friendly green technology and to introduce green 
construction process to have a safe world.  
 
Technical papers and posters were invited from the academicians/ researchers/ professionals/ 
experts working on environmental technology and construction engineering around the world 
well before the conference date. About 220 abstracts were received; after review, a total of 122 
technical papers and 6 keynote articles were selected for publications in the Conference 
Proceedings after rigorous review. Also 5 posters out of 10 were accepted to present in the 
conference. Academicians, researchers, professionals and other personalities from different 
countries including Australia, Bangladesh, Germany, Hong Kong, India, Japan, Malaysia, United 
Kingdom etc submitted their scientific contributions in this conference. Papers have been lightly 
edited to homogenize the style and to revise the contents based on reviewers’ comments. 
 iv 
However, the final responsibility for the contents, quality and the presentation of the papers is 
held by each individual author. In the proceedings, only the executive summary of the papers are 
printed and hence published, however, full papers are available in a CD-Rom enclosed with the 
proceedings. 
 
I would like to acknowledge the great efforts of the authors, who jointly and/or individually 
contributed by submitting papers. I might appreciate the supports received from the reviewer’s 
who did it perfectly. The sincere contributions of the Advisors (faculty members of CEE 
department), Conveners, Co-conveners and the members of all of the committees are 
acknowledged. Special heartiest thanks to Professor Dr. Mushtaq Ahmed and Professor  Dr. G. 
M. Jahid Hasan for putting their excellent joint efforts with me for editing the proceedings 
including composing the text, figures, tables and photographs, which is indeed a tedious job. 
Finally, great appreciation is due to the Title Sponsors Ratanpur Steel Re-rolling Mills (RSRM) 
Ltd, Chittagong; Seven Circle Cement Limited, Dhaka and Comprehensive Disaster Management 
Program (CDMP), Ministry of Food and Disaster Management, Ministry of the Peoples Republic 
of Bangladesh in association with US Aid, European Union, Norwegian Embassy, Australian 
Aid, Sida, and UNDP for financing the major portion of the cost to organize the Conference. 
Special gratitude to Holcim Cement (Bangladesh) Ltd for providing conference bags and to 
Lafarge Surma Cement Ltd for providing Gala Dinner of the conference. Also thanks to other 
sponsors who financially contributed through the sponsorship in the form of advertisement in the 
souvenir published on the eve of ICETCESD 2012. 
 
 
 
 
Professor Dr M. Aktarul Islam Chowdhury 
Civil and Environmental Engineering Department  
Shahjalal University of Science and Technology, Sylhet 
 March  2012 
 
 
v 
 
 
LOCAL ORGANIZING COMMITTEE 
 
Chief Patron 
Professor Dr. Md. Saleh Uddin, Vice-Chancellor, SUST 
 
Chairman 
Professor Dr. Mohammod Aktarul Islam Chowdhury, Dean, School of Applied Sciences 
and Technology, and Head, CEE Department, SUST 
 
Vice-Chairman 
Professor Dr. Mushtaq Ahmed, CEE Department, SUST 
 
Secretary 
Professor Dr. G. M. Jahid Hasan, CEE Department, SUST 
 
Joint Secretary 
Dr. Md. Tauhid-Ur-Rahman, Associate Professor, CEE Department, SUST 
Dr. Muhammad Azizul Hoque, Associate Professor, CEE Department, SUST 
 
Assistant Secretary 
Md Mesbah Uddin, Assistant Professor, CEE Department, SUST 
Mohammad Shahidur Rahman, Assistant Professor, CEE Department, SUST 
Bijit Kumar Banik, Assistant Professor, CEE Department, SUST 
H M A Mahzuz, Assistant Professor, CEE Department, SUST 
Md Saiful Islam, Assistant Professor, CEE Department, SUST 
Md Imran Kabir, Assistant Professor, CEE Department, SUST 
 
Members 
Gulam Md Munna, Lecturer, CEE Department, SUST 
Shilpy Rani Basak, Lecturer, CEE Department, SUST 
Md Bashirul Haque, Lecturer, CEE Department, SUST 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
vi 
INTERNATIONAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE 
 
 
Prof Emeritus Hiroshi Yokota, University of Miyazaki, Japan 
Prof Raffaello Cossu, University of Padova, Italy 
Prof C Visvanathan, Asian Institute of Technology, Thailand 
Prof Cheong Hin Fatt, National University of Singapore, Singapore 
Prof Saleh Tanveer, Ohio State University, USA 
Prof A M M Safiullah, BUET, Bangladesh 
Prof Alamgir Mujibul Haque, BUET, Bangladesh 
Prof M Feroze Ahmed, BUET, Bangladesh 
Prof M A Rouf, BUET, Bangladesh 
Prof Muhammed Alamgir, KUET, Bangladesh 
Prof Monjur Hossain, KUET, Bangladesh 
Prof Md Nuruzzaman, DUET, Bangladesh 
Prof A K M Sadrul Islam, IUT, Bangladesh 
Prof Md Jahangir Alam, CUET, Bangladesh 
Prof Abhik Gupta, Assam University, India 
Prof M. J. Marriott, University of East London, UK 
Prof Max M. Haggblom, Rutgers University, USA 
Prof Vasantha Arabinthan, University of Southern Queensland, Australia 
Prof Uwe E. Dorka, University of Kassel, Germany 
Prof Md Mazharul Hoque, BUET, Bangladesh 
Prof William Hogland, Linnaeus University, Sweden 
Prof P. Agamuthu, University of Malaya, Malaysia 
Prof Ghasem Najafpour, Babol Noshirvoni University of Technology, Iran 
Prof M Shamim Z Bosunia, BUET, Bangladesh 
Prof Govind Singh Bhardwaj, Maharana Pratap University of Agriculture & Tech., India 
Dr MAG Michael Jungmeier, E.C.O. Institute of Ecology, Klagenfurt, Austria 
Dr Satoshi Takewaka, University of Tsukuba, Japan 
Dr Tsutomu Sato, Hokkaido University, Japan 
Dr Abdulkareem Sh. Mahdi Al-Obaidi, Taylor’s University College, Malaysia 
Dr Sirajuddin M Horaginamani, Bharathidasan University, Tamil Nadu, India 
Dr Hemanta Kumar Doloi, University of Melbourne, Australia 
Dr Arics Roda D Romallasa, Central Philippine University, Philippine 
Dr Rqsdanelli, University Sumatera Utara, Indonesia 
vii 
SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL COMMITTEE 
 
 
Prof M A Matin, BUET, Bangladesh 
Prof M Asraf Ali, BUET, Bangladesh 
Prof Quazi Hamidul Bari, KUET, Bangladesh 
Prof Kazi Sazzad Hossain, KUET, Bangladesh 
Prof Md Saiful Islam, KUET, Bangladesh 
Prof Hasib Mohammed Ahsan, BUET, Bangladesh 
Prof S M Atiqul Islam, DUET, Bangladesh 
Prof Tahur Ahmed, RUET, Bangladesh 
Prof Munaz Ahmed Noor, BUET, Bangladesh 
Prof Md Hajrat Ali, CUET, Bangladesh 
Prof Swapan Kumar Palit, CUET, Bangladesh 
Prof Umme Kulsum Novera, BUET, Bangladesh 
Prof Mushtaq Ahmed, SUST, Bangladesh 
Prof G. M. Jahid Hasan, SUST, Bangladesh 
Dr Parthankar Choudhury, Assam University, India 
Dr Mithra Dey, Assam University, India 
Dr Fauziah Shazhul Hamid, University of Malaya, Malaysia 
Dr G N Chattopadhyay, Visva-Bharati, India 
Dr Jahangir Alam, BUET, Bangladesh 
Dr Abdur Rahman Bhuiyan, CUET, Bangladesh 
Dr Md. Rabiul Alam, CUET, Bangladesh 
Dr Md Tauhid-ur-Rahman, SUST, Bangladesh 
Dr Zia Wadud, BUET, Bangladesh 
Dr Charisma Farheen Chowdhury, BUET, Bangladesh 
vii 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
Preface iii 
Committee v 
  
Keynote papers  
  
Zero-Discharge ETP for Textile Dying Industry: An Advanced Option for 
Environmental Sustainability 
Dr. M. Feroze Ahmed, Dr. Tanvir Ahmed and Dr. Nehreen Majed 
1 
Tips from Professional Experience in Construction Field 
Dr. Md. Monjur Hossain 15 
Eco-Friendly Building Construction Technology to Handle Climate Change Effects  
Mohammod Aktarul Islam Chowdhury 32 
Techno-Economic Analysis of Green Electricity Generation from Rice Husk 
A K M Sadrul Islam and Md Ahiduzzaman 44 
Recent Earthquake Related Activities in Bangladesh 
Mehedi Ahmed Ansary 58 
Road Safety: An Overview of  Key Facts and the Way Forward 
Dr. Md. Mazharul Hoque 77 
 
Technical papers  
  
Capture and Storage-A Sustainable Technology to Cut Carbon Emission: A Literature 
Review 
Tarique Ahmad and Md. Sadique Nawab 
84 
Domestic Wastewater Treatment in North Eastern Region of India through Facultative 
Lagoon–Polishing Pond System 
Harikrishna Bala and Mohammad Jawed 
98 
A Modified Method for Stability Analysis of  Unsaturated  Residual Soil Hill  Slopes 
Utpal Kumar Das and  Bibha Das Saikia 109 
Planning of Natural Disaster Management:  A Case Study of Floods in India 
Mubeen Beg and Saif Said 123 
Environmental Hazards due to Marble Slurry Disposal, Chitrakootnagar, Udaipur, 
Rajasthan, India 
Dr Govind Singh Bhardwaj 
137 
viii 
 
Data Change Detection with Multi-Temporal Remote Sensing 
Anup Kumar Karda and Dr Govind Singh Bhardwaj 149 
Radioactive Waste: Residual Waste from Back End Fuel Cycle 
Amartanshu Srivastava,  Amal Pervez and   Dr Govind Singh Bhardwaj 156 
Radioactive Waste Management  
Amal Pervez, Amartanshu Shrivastava and Dr Govind Singh Bhardwaj 167 
Coastal Engineering and Estuarine Processes – Must Technologies for Coastal Zones 
Ankit Purohit and Dr Govind Singh Bhardwaj 178 
Magnetic and Petrographic Investigations of  Khairmalaia  Andesite Rock Bodies, 
South of Chittourgarh, Rajasthan  
Y H Rao, Dr Govind Singh Bhardwaj, Dr M Venkateswarlu and Dr B 
Ramalingeswara Rao 
187 
Investigation of the Effects of Road Accidents on Traffic Performance Using Micro-
Simulation   
Md Mahmud Hasan and Shamas Bajwa 
197 
Estimating Bio-Kinetics for Nitrogen Source Oxidation Processes Using Online 
Measurements in Activated Sludge  
M A Hoque and V Aravinthan 
205 
Application of Conceptual Hydrological Models (Rainfall-Runoff) in Predicting 
Ungauged Catchments: Dilettantism to Diligence in Hydrology  
Syed Abu Shoaib, Andras Bardossy and Nahid Sultana 
221 
Impact of Climate Change on Temporal Variation of Floods in Bangladesh  
Md Shahjahan Ali, Tanziha Mahjabin and Takashi Hosoda 235 
An Analysis of Existing Water Supply System to Minimize Health Risk Hazard in the 
Mongolian Ger Area  
Shahriar Shams, Takashi Honda and Sadia Chowdhury 
249 
Watershed Management Considering the Impact of Climate Change: A Review of 
National Water Management Plan (NWMP) Program of  Bangladesh  
Saiful Alam, Syed Abu Shoaib, Nahid Sultana, Md Hasan Shahriar and Md 
Jahid Hossain 
260 
A Case Study to Evaluate Community Based Organization’s Activity for Appropriate 
Management of Ecosan Toilet in Rural Areas of Bangladesh  
Md Moslehuddin Parvez, Qazi Azaduzzaman, Abdullah Al Mamun and Dr 
Kunio Takahashi 
273 
Evaluation of  Ecosan Toilet as an Appropriate Sanitation Option for Rural Areas of 
Bangladesh in Light of Sanitary Improvement: A Case Study 
Qazi Azaduzzaman, Abdullah-Al-Mamun and Dr Kunio Takahashi 
286 
ix 
 
Electricity Generation via Microbial Fuel Cells using Cation Exchange Resin: A New 
Approach  
Maksudur Rahman Khan, Md Shaiful Alam Amin, Md Rezaul Karim, T K Deb 
and Kaniz Ferdous 
300 
Temperature Dependent Barrier Height Analysis of Ni-Si (n-type) Schottky Contact 
with the Tunneling Effect 
Dr M Khaled Husain, Md Shazzad Hossain and Md Ismail Hossain 
309 
Physical and Environmental Condition and Performance Ranking of Multi-Storied 
Apartments Housing/Complexes: A Case Study of Selected Housing Projects in 
Dhaka city  
M Salaha Uddin, Mokhlesur Rahman and Farhadur Reza 
321 
A Comparative Study of  Biodiesel Production from Different Raw Materials  
Kaniz Ferdous, Anjan Deb, Jannatul Ferdous, M Rakib Uddin, Maksudur R 
Khan and M A Islam 
332 
Development of Three Step Method for Biodiesel Production From Waste Cook Oil 
by low cost  
Kaniz Ferdous, Md Rahim Uddin, Rehnuma Islam, M Rakib Uddin, Maksudur 
R Khan and M A Islam 
344 
Preparation of Biodiesel from Soybean Oil by Using Heterogeneous Catalyst  
M Rakib Uddin, Kaniz Ferdous, Maksudur R Khan, Md Jahangir Alam and M 
A Islam 
354 
Bioelectricity Generation from Food Processing Industry Wastewater Through Dual 
Chamber MFC  
R R Raju, K Islam, M S A Amin, Kaniz Ferdous and Maksudur R Khan 
367 
Arsenic Removal Using Modified Ceramic Filter in Rural Bangladesh: A Field Study  
Kumar Fagun Mallick, Quazi Hamidul Bari, K Mahbub Hassan, Jun 
Nakajima, Md Selim Reza and J K Golder 
379 
Monitoring of a Low Cost Ceramic Membrane Bio-Reactor by Observing the 
Physical Parameters for Wastewater Treatment  
Jewel Kumar Golder, Quazi Hamidul Bari, Md Mahmudul Hasan, Kumar 
Fagun Mallick and Md Selim Reza 
388 
Development of A Matlab Based Tool to Evaluate the Interaction of Tidal Fluctuation 
And Groundwater  
B K Banik, Daniela Plath and W Schneider 
396 
Development of A Matlab Based Analytical Calculation Tool for Groundwater 
Pollution Problems 
B K Banik and W Schneider 
410 
Car Parking Characteristics in Dhaka Metropolitan City, Bangladesh: A Case Study  
Mahzabin Afroz, Hasnin Muktadir, Quazi Sazzad Hossain and Md Enamul 
Hasan 
424 
x 
 
Estimation of Ideal Saturation Flow Rate at Signalized Intersections with respect to 
the Road Conditions of Dhaka Metropolitan City, Bangladesh  
Ismail Saifullah, Mahzabin Afroz, Q Sazzad Hossain, Md Saiful Islam and 
Molla Ashikur Rahman 
435 
Improving Operational Capacity of Approach-Roads of any Bridge for Future Traffic 
Management  
Shohana Iffat and Ashfia Siddique 
441 
Investigation of Bond Strength of Bamboo and Bamboo Twig with Concrete as a 
Potential Reinforcement 
Md Ahsan Sabbir, Saiada Fuadi Fancy and Kashif Mahmud 
447 
Investigation on Failure in Shore Protective Work along Marine Drive Road at Cox’s 
Bazar  
Md. Ataur Rahman and Md. Nasimul Hoque Chowdhury 
462 
Potentiality of Electro-coagulated Metal Hydroxide Sludge (EMHS) from Textile 
Industry in Manufacturing of Building Materials 
T M Adyel, S H Rahman, S M Nazrul Islam, H M Sayen, Mala Khan, M A 
Gafur, M M Zaman and M M R Bhuiyan 
473 
Analysis of Wastewater Quality: a Case Study of Rajshahi City Corporation, 
Bangladesh  
Md Mosiur Rahman and Md Shafi Uddin Miah 
483 
Assessment of Environmental Management System (EMS) and Environmental 
Aspects/Impacts of Selected Scientific Laboratories of Jahangirnagar University, 
Dhaka, Bangladesh 
Fayezun Nahar Begum, S. M. Nazrul Islam, T M Adyel and M. Hafizur 
Rahman 
492 
Investigation on Land Reclamation in Char Islands of Bangladesh using Mathematical 
Modelling Tool: A Case Study on Char Mainka and Montaz Area  
Mohammad Ziaur Rahman and Golam Mohiuddin 
501 
Freshwater Molluscs in the Northeastern Region of Bangladesh  
M M Shahjahan Bhuiyan, Md Sarwar Jahan, Md Redwanur Rahman and 
Minu Haque 
510 
Interference on Ecosystem and its Impact on Surrounding Terrestrial Environment: A 
Case of Buriganga River and Adjacent Areas  
Fatema Meher Khan 
522 
Determination of Plant Nutrients and Organic Matter Content in Textile Sludge  
Taslima Zaman, Md Mostafizur Rahman,A K I Kamal, M D H Molla, 
Rashadur Rahman and Md Khabir Uddin 
537 
Appraisal of Stored Rainwater Quality for Drinking Water Supply in the 
Southwestern Coastal Area of Bangladesh 
Sajal K adhikary and Md Ikramul Haque 
548 
xi 
 
Analyzing Groundwater Quality from Shallow Aquifer Using Regression Technique 
in a Northwestern District of Bangladesh  
Sajal K Adhikary, Md Monjur Hossain, Md Mahidur Rahman and Md 
Monjur-A-Elahi 
560 
Power Challenge for a Sustainable Future: Perspective Bangladesh  
Rezwan Ahmed and Riasat Khan 570 
Removal of Phenol by Locally Isolated High Performance Phenol Degrading Strain 
Md Mahiuddin, A N M Fakhruddin and Abdullah-Al-Mahin     580 
Evaluating the Adaptation Strategy of  Livelihood Pattern in the Water Logged Area 
of South-West Coastal Bangladesh  
Sangeeta Rani Mollick and Abul Kalam Azad 
591 
An Investigation on Ground Water Level Depletion in Dhaka City  
Selina Jahan Sumi, Shamshad Irin and Anika Yunus 603 
Assessment of Groundwater Quality of Dhaka City  
Shamshad Irin, Selina Jahan and Anika Yunus 617 
Water Supply System in the Arsenic Affected Area: Policy and Institutional 
Distribution 
 M Aminul Haque 
628 
Assessment of Shallow Groundwater Quality in Some Selected Wards of  KCC Area: 
Southwest Region of Bangladesh  
Sajal K Adhikary, Md Manjur-A-Elahi, Md Monzur Hossain and A M Iqbal 
Hossain 
638 
Benefit and Cost Estimation of  Electronic Toll Collection System: A Case Study for 
Bhairab Bridge  
S Y Muntasir, R M Chowdhury, S R Musabbir and M M Rahman 
652 
Evaluating Surface Water Quality of Magura Municipality Area, Bangladesh 
Farzina Akter and A K Azad 666 
Characterization of Waste in Pharmaceuticals Industries  
Abu Jubayer and Abul Kalam Azad 679 
A Study on The Students’ Perception of Pedestrian Risk  
Abdullah Al Hashib, Md Sabbir zaman, Montasir Islam Arin, Dr Shakil M 
Rifaat and Md Al-Amin 
686 
Green Roof: A Relief in Dense Urban Development  
Sudipta Barua and Ashik Ikbal 698 
Determination of Soil Bearing Capacity and Design of Shallow Foundation by Visual 
Basic  
Shantana Sheikh and A Z M Sanaul Haque 
705 
xii 
 
Water Supply Versus Demand at KUET Campus  
Mousumy Akter, K M Hassan and Dr Quazi Hamidul Bari 718 
Improvement of Subgrade Using Jute Geotextile (Jgt) 
Dr Md Mizanur Rahman and Abdur Rahim 728 
Water Quality Analysis of Surma and Kushiyara River  
Tajmunnaher and M Aktarul Islam Chowdhury 738 
Assessment of Groundwater Potential for Irrigation in Barind Region of Bangladesh: 
An Application of TMWB Model  
Mahmudur Rahman, A T M Jahangir and A H M Saadat 
756 
Effects of Capping Systems on Compressive Strength of Concrete  
Sushil K Das, Sajal K Adhikary, Abu Zakir Morshed, M M Hossain Mridha 
and M Giash Uddin 
768 
Effects of Various Types of Curing on the Strength of Concrete Made from Manually 
Molded Brick Aggregates  
Abu Zakir Morshed, Sushil K Das, Sajal K Adhikary, Abdur Rahman and 
Rouhidur Rahman 
774 
Adaptation Strategies on Water Supply and Sanitation Due to Climate Change at 
Selected Coastal Areas of Bangladesh  
Imon Das Gupta and Md Saiful Islam 
782 
Estimation of Suspended Sediment Concentration of Different Water Bodies using 
Low Cost Portable Digital Camera  
G. M. Jahid Hasan, Fayzul Kabir and Sayed Zakir Hossain 
799 
Health Risk Associated with Urban Water Supply: A Case Study in Khulna City 
Corporation (KCC) Area  
A K M Maminul Islam, Md Abdur Rab, Md Manjur-A-Elahi, Md Rezaul 
Karim and K M Hassan 
708 
Re-thinking Slums and Squatters: Alternative Sustainable Approach to Solve Housing 
Crisis in Metropolitan Cities  
M Arefeen Ibrahim and Mania Tahsina Taher 
723 
A Study on the Biodegradation of Wastewater from Food Processing Industry 
Enriched with Glucose, Sucrose and Starch using Modified Manometric Respirometer  
M S Rahman, M A Islam, M S A Amin and M S Hossain 
736 
Comparative Laboratory Study on Hydraulic Performances of Sandbags and Gabions 
M N Newaz Khan, Md Shamim Haider and Aysha Akter 743 
Experimental Investigation on Heat Transfer Through Infill Wall  
Md Zahidul Islam, Md Mehedi Iqbal and Md Harunur Rashid 751 
Predicting Impacts of Flood Control, Drainage and Irrigation Project (FCDI) on the 
Haor Ecosystem and Fisheries: A Case Study on Proposed Gungiajuri FCDI Project  
M Mukteruzzaman, Md Shibly Sadik and Md Waji Ullah 
763 
xiii 
 
Measurement of wastewater biodegradability using headspace gas respirometer 
M S Rahman, M A Islam, M S A Amin and T Ahammad 771 
Application of Multifarious Compounds in Shrimp Firms and its Impact on the 
Environment 
Md Monzur Hossain, K M Hassan, Shuvo Ramo Saha and Quazi Hamidul 
Bari 
779 
Ecosan: An Innovative Approach to Sanitation in Rural Bangladesh  
Shuvo Ramo Saha, K M Hassan, Md Monzur Hossain and Quazi Hamidul 
Bari 
789 
Public Transport Versus Private Transport: Which Could be the Better Option for a 
Mega City, Dhaka? 
Mir Alimullah Faruque and Md Sabbir Sharif 
802 
Effects of Climate Change on Rice Production of Sylhet Region  
M Aktarul Islam Chowdhury and Md Wasif-E-Elahi 811 
Oxygen Uptake Behavior of Active Settled Sludge Collected from Municipal Sewer 
Lines – A Respirometric Study  
M S Rahman, M A Islam, M S A Amin and M Haque 
821 
Vulnerability and Adaptation Practices in the Settlement Pattern: A Case of Water 
Logged Area in Keshabpur Upazila 
Saimun Kabir 
828 
Water Supply and Sanitation Facilities on Low Income Slum Areas of Dhaka City  
Subrata Chowdhury and Nusrat R Binte Razzak 850 
A Comparative Study of Natural Aggregate Concrete and Recycled Aggregate 
Concrete  
Farhana Chowdhury and Subrata Chowdhury 
863 
Evaluation of the Effects of Traffic Noise at Selected Locations of Dhaka and Sylhet 
City  
M Aktarul Islam Chowdhury, Md Saiful Islam and S Nahar 
876 
Char Formation Process and Livelihoods Characteristics of Char Dwellers of Alluvial 
River in Bangladesh  
M Arifur Rahman and Md Munsur Rahman 
888 
Rain Water Harvesting and Water Conservation in Bangladesh Context 
 Qazi Azizul Mowla 902 
Urban Open Space and Green Proposals of  Khulna City Master Plan and Their 
Implementation  
Tusar Kanti Roy 
913 
Deflection of Cyclone Track in Bay of Bengal  
Nikhil Chandra Sarkar, Anowarul Islam and Sujit Kumar Debsarma 928 
xiv 
 
Regional Aspect of Flood Forecasting and Warning Services and its Impact on the 
Flood Disaster Management in Bangladesh: An Overview  
Md Sazzad Hossain, Md Amirul Hossain, A K M Saif Uddin and Md Abul 
Bashar 
940 
Transport Mode Choice Model for School Trip in Sylhet city  
Md Bashirul Haque, Md Mahmudul Huque Chayan and Md Masud Rana 950 
Indigenous Coping Practices to Reduce the Vulnerability of Natural Disaster: A Case 
Study of Flood 
Susmita Sharmin Munia, Sauda Sultana and Saima Rahman 
962 
Capacity Need Assessment of the Coastal Communities of Bangladesh in Adaptation 
to Climate Change  
Md Ehsanul Hoque and Subrata Kumer Sarker 
969 
Solar Desalination using Low Cost Tubular Solar Still (TSS) 
Md Abdur Rab, Dr Kh Md Shafiul Islam, A K M Maminul Islam and Md 
Manjur-A-Elahi 
982 
Barriers in Adopting Energy Efficiency in Residential Buildings of Dhaka, 
Bangladesh  
Tahmina Ahsan 
996 
Home for Homeless: A Sense of  Belonging  
Ajmeri Nusrat Shoma and Ashik Vaskor Mannan 1002 
Study on the Performance of Existing Pond Sand Filters in Paikgachha Upazila, 
Khulna  
Md Selim Reza, Md Saiful Islam, Md Fazlul Haque, K F Mallick and J K 
Golder 
1012 
Sustainability in Architectural Built Form of Sylhet Region in Context of Cultural 
Ethnicity  
Rezwan Sobhan and Kawshik Saha 
1022 
Introducing a Frame Shape to Improve Building Performance under Earthquake 
Excitations 
S M Ashfaqul Hoq, Md Ahsan Sabbir and Kashif Mahmud 
1030 
Assessment of Status of Groundwater Arsenic Contamination and Community 
Vulnerability for Sustainable Drinking Water Supply at Muradnagar Upazila under 
Comilla District, Bangladesh  
Motaleb Hossain Sarker 
1040 
Climate Change Impacts on Water Related Sectors of Dhaka City and Assessing the 
Plausible Adaptation Options  
Rifat Quamrul Alam and Bushra Monowar Duti 
1053 
xv 
 
Industrial Pollution in Rajshahi City, Bangladesh  
S M Helal Uddin, Md Rashidul Hasan, M S Syeduzzaman and Md Belal 
Hossain Sikder 
1062 
A Study on Noise Pollution in Various Area of Dhaka city  
Pramanik Biplob, M Ahmeduzzaman, Rohman Ashikur, Sharmin Aktar, Reza 
Selim and Islam Monirul 
1071 
Assessment of Air Pollution Associated with Brick Production  
Pramanik Biplob, M Ahmeduzzaman, Reza Selim, Sharmin Aktar, Islam 
Monirul, Rohman Ashikur and Fatima Shamsad 
1079 
Evaluation of Water Supply and Sanitation Facilities in Rajshahi City  
Pramanik Biplob and M Ahmeduzzaman 1087 
Water Quality Analysis in Different Stages of Saidabad Water Treatment Plant  
Pramanik Biplob, M Ahmeduzzaman and Reza Selim 1095 
A Study on the Impact of Domestic and Industrial Waste Effluent and Urban Storm 
Water Runoff on Water Quality of Turag River, Dhaka  
Mosabbir Pasha, Z H Mahmood, M A Hossain and Shahriar Shams 
1104 
Electricity Generation using a Membrane Less Microbial Fuel Cell During Waste 
Water Treatment  
Tammin Haque, Rubayat Tarannum, M S A Amin and Maksudur R Khan 
1112 
Performance of Water Hyacinth for Improving the Effluent Quality of a Typical Paper 
Mill  
Md Selim Reza, M Saiful Islam, M A Rahman, K F Mallick and J K Golder 
1123 
The Effect of Chemical Admixtures on the Geotechnical Parameters of Organic Soil: 
A New Statistical Model  
Islam M Rafizul, M Assaduzzaman and Muhammed Alamgir 
1131 
Characterization and Removal of Pollutant in Landfill Lysimeter Leachate using 
Chemical Coagulants  
Islam M Rafizul,  M Alamgir and Imran Rahaman 
1144 
Variability of Parameters Involved in Leachate Pollution Index and Determination of 
LPI from Solid Waste Landfill in Bangladesh  
Enamul Basher, Marzia Hoque Tania and Md. Samiul Alam 
1159 
Geotechnical Characterization of Reconstituted Organic Soil of the Selected Site at 
South-Western Region of Bangladesh  
Islam M Rafizul and Muhammed Alamgir 
1172 
Planning and Optimizing the Route for Collection and Disposal of Municipal Solid 
Waste at Khulna City using GIS  
M Rafizul Islam, Saiful Azim, Md Risvi Kizer and Muhammed Alamgir 
1187 
Generation of Green Electricity by Electrolysis Process  
Abu Yousuf, Ahmed Nazmus Sakib, Sreejon Das and Salma Akhter Iqbal 1199 
xvi 
 
Comparative Study of use of Stone, Bamboo, Wood and Rattan as Course Aggregate 
in Concrete  
H M A Mahzuz, M Ahmed, M M Dhar and Sunaiya 
1209 
Analysis of Water Quality Status of Buriganga River  
Md Abu Zafor, A A Masrur Ahmed and A Rahman 1219 
An Experimental Investigation on Mechanical Behavior of Macro Synthetic Fibre 
Reinforced Concrete  
M J Hasan, M Afroz and H M I Mahmud 
1230 
Soil Erosion and Runoff with Variation in Rainfall Intensity, Slope and Vegetation 
Cover: A Case Study in Khulna, Bangladesh  
Mahmud M Minhaz, N H Chowdhur, R M Shariar, Rashid M Hasanur and 
Hasan M Kamrul 
1240 
Reinforced Concrete Building Slab with Hollow Concrete Partition Block  
Mohiuddin Ahmed and Fatema Ahmed 1249 
Land Use Pattern and its Dynamics in the South Western Bangladesh – A Case Study 
on Debhata Upazila  
Sadia Afrose 
1259 
Biosorption of Congo-Red Dye on Azadirachta Indica Leaf Powder  
Maksudur Rahman Khan, Zobayer Bin Mukhlish, M R Karim and T K Deb 1272 
Impact of Climate Change on Major Water Related Disasters in the Coastal Area of 
Bangladesh 
M Monowar Hossain, Md Mobassarul Hasan and Z Haque Khan 
1281 
A study on Erosion and Deposition Problem on Paturia-Daulatdia Reach of Padma 
River in Bangladesh 
M Monowar Hossain, M Islam Fahmi and Md Mizanur Rahman 
1292 
Methodology for Formulation of Equivalent Steel Section for Partially Encased 
Composite Column with Verification 
Debaroti Ghosh and Mahbuba Begum 
1308 
Comparative Study on Building Construction Technology among Dhaka and Sylhet 
city 
M Saiful Islam, Hasibur Rahman and Md Ashrafuzzaman 
1318 
Non-Destructive Test of Three School Buildings in Sylhet City, Bangladesh 
K M Khaleduzzaman and Mehedi Ahmed Ansary  1330 
Cost Effective Design of Zero Energy Building in Context of Bangladesh 
Md Kamrul Hassan and G. M. Jahid Hasan 1340 
Design and Feature of a Universal Respirometric Device Fabricated at SUST 
M S Rahman and M A Islam 1349 
  
xvii 
 
Sustainable Management in Water Supply System in Rajshahi city, Bangladesh 
S M Helal Uddin, Md Golam Mostafa, A B M Hamidul Haque, Md Redwanur 
Rahman and Md Belal Hossin Sikder 
1355 
Effluent Treatment Plant Design for a Knitwear Industry 
Syed Tasnem Mahmood 1365 
Development of a Numerical Model to Assess the Contaminant Transport of the Lake 
Kiyanja Watershed, Uganda 
M Tauhid-Ur-Rahman, Akira Mano, Keiko Udo and Yoshinobu Ishibashi 
1377 
 
1 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh   
 
 
 
ZERO-DISCHARGE ETP FOR TEXTILE DYING INDUSTRY: AN ADVANCED 
OPTION FOR ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY 
 
 
Dr. M. Feroze Ahmed1, Dr. Tanvir Ahmed2 and Dr. Nehreen Majed3 
 
 
1.  Introduction 
 
Textile is the top foreign exchange earning sector in Bangladesh, at the same time wastewater 
from textile dyeing has also become the top polluter of water and soil resources in the country. In 
Bangladesh, textile dying industries are grouped into red category that requires extensive 
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) and installation of treatment facilities to establish 
textile dyeing (ECR, 1997). But most of the industries do not have a treatment plants and 
discharge untreated effluent with very high pollution potential in water or on land. Some 
industries have physico-chemical and biological treatment plants which can reduce BOD, COD 
and colour to some extend but extended aeration and high dose of chemicals are required to 
reduce SS, BOD and COD to acceptable level but dissolved solids remain high. Some industries 
dilute the effluent by adding fresh water to meet the effluent quality standards but the total 
pollution loads discharged in the environment remain unchanged. Many of the treatment plants 
are not operated continuously for high cost of operation. As a result, severe pollution of water 
and soil resources around the industrial belt in Bangladesh due indiscriminate disposal of 
wastewater has become a great environmental concern. 
 
Textile dyeing requires huge quantity of water, which is contaminated with large quantities of 
salt, dye pigments and dissolved and suspended impurities either derived from fabrics or added 
for dyeing and discharged as wastewater. The wastewater from textile dyeing is characterized by 
high pH, turbidity, colour, dissolved and suspended solids, Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) 
and Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD). The usual BOD of composite dyeing wastewater ranges 
from 300 to 600, COD from 350 to 800, Suspended Solids from 250 350 and Total Dissolved 
Solids as high as 3000 mg/L.  Treatment of textile wastewater is relatively difficult and costly. 
Pollution and public health problems caused by textile dyeing wastewater have become the focus 
of the press and environmentalists for a number of years. The department of Environment as per 
provisions of  ECA (1995) is trying to deal with the matter by setting deadlines for installing ETP 
and imposing fines for not operating ETPs but no improvement of situation is visible. About 100 
units out of 300 knit processing industries within Bangladesh Knitwear Manufacturers & Export 
Association (BKMEA) may have installed ETPs. Wastewaters from around 162 knit dyeing 
                                                
1Former Professor, Department of Civil Engineering, BUET, Dhaka 
2Assistant Professor, Department of Civil Engineering, BUET, Dhaka 
3Assistant Professor, Department of Environmental Science & Management, NSU, Dhaka 
 
2 
 
industries around Greater Dhaka area have made all the water bodies in dry season coloured. It 
has been reported in local news media that some of the dyeing industries are hiding by pumping 
their effluent in the ground. The resulting pollution of groundwater has far reaching 
consequences 
 
It is not possible to control environmental pollution from dyeing wastewater by the existing 
liberal effluent quality standards (EQS) of Bangladesh. The present effluent quality standards 
were formulated 18 years ago considering the abundance of effluent receiving water (surface 
water) in Bangladesh. The flow of the existing stream has tremendously reduced in the dry 
season but composite dyeing industries have greatly flourished in the country during the last 
decade. Moreover, there are no suitable streams in the close vicinity of many factories for 
disposal by dilution. The improvement of quality of the industrial effluent is required to prevent 
pollution of the environment.  The quality of the land around clusters of factories like Export 
Processing Zones (EPZs) in Bangladesh is fast deteriorating, even after largely complying with 
the EQS of Bangladesh (ECR, 1997). Discharge of excessive amount of salt with the effluent is 
mainly responsible for elevated water and soil salinity and making the land around industrial 
clusters barren. The combined wastewater discharged from an industrial cluster is shown in Fig. 
1. 
 
Effective treatment of wastewater from dyeing industries and safe disposal of treated effluent and 
sludge are only options to protect the environment. Chemical coagulation by an appropriate 
coagulant and oxidation by a strong oxidizing agent are required to remove colour and biological 
 
 
 
Figure 1  Discharge of Wastewater from Textile Dyeing in Natural Water 
 
3 
 
treatment can reduce BOD and COD. But these conventional methods cannot reduce salt content 
of the wastewater. Advanced treatment methods like Sequential Batch Reactor (SBR), Electro-
chemical and Membrane Bio-filtration (MBR) processes are being used for the treatment of 
dyeing wastewater. Reduction of SS, BOD, and COD should not be the target of ETPs for dyeing 
effluent, recovery of salt is also required to prevent salinity of natural waters and soil and to re-
use of recovered salt as well. Again when salt is separated fron water, the water becomes fresh 
and it can be reused in the dyeing process. Thus, zero-discharge treatment plant, which does not 
discharge anything outside the boundary of the industry is possible in the operation in textile 
dyeing plants.  
 
 
2.  Technologies for Zero Discharge 
 
Textile dyeing wastewater contains large quantities of suspended and dissolved impurities 
including colour pigments.  In Zero Discharge option, the bulk quantity of water and salt used for 
dyeing is recovered and recycled where other impurities are partly destroyed, reduced, 
accumulated and then dewatered and dried to small volumes and finally contained in “Secured 
Landfill” within the boundary of the factory.  The processes involved in the zero discharge ETPs 
involve treatment of wastewater, recovery of fresh water, recovery of salt and safe disposal of 
small residual solid wastes. Several technologies are required in each process to install a Zero 
Discharge ETP.  
 
2.1 Treatment of wastewater 
 
The technologies used for treatment of wastewater include both conventional and advanced 
wastewater treatment technologies. The conventional primary treatments include oxidation, 
chemical coagulation, sedimentation while the advanced technologies include electo-chemical 
oxidation, electro-coagulation for the destruction/removal of colour, COD and some BOD. The 
secondary biological treatment for reduction of BOD and COD is accomplished in aeration tank, 
membrane bio-filtration and sequential batch reactor (SBR). In sequential batch reactor (SBR), 
the content of one tank is aerated while the other tank allowed to settle (Fig. 2). This system does 
not require a secondary sedimentation tank after aeration. The tertiary treatment include further 
oxidation by chlorine or ozone, sand and activated carbon filtration to reduced suspended solid, 
volatile organics, colour etc..  The tertiary treatment is done to reduce the pollutants to trace level 
and make the effluent suitable for recovery of water and salt. 
 
The wastewater from different operations in the dyeing process can also be collected in separate 
tanks for treatment.  The primary objective is to segregate wastewaters of different characteristics 
for adoption of appropriate cost-effective treatment. 
 
2.2  Water Recovery 
 
Water is separated from the effluent stream by reverse osmosis (RO) and sometimes 
microfiltration (MF) and/or ultrafiltration (UF) are applied as pretreatment for reverse osmosis 
(Figs. 3 and 4 ). The RO process allows only water to pass through the membrane while the 
remaining inflow containing all the impurities including salts comes out of the system called 
4 
 
reject. The inflow (reject) from the first stage RO is allowed to pass through second stage RO 
under higher pressure to collect more water. A third stage RO has also been installed in some plat 
to operate at very high pressure to squeeze out more water and concentrate the reject.  The 
permeates (recovery) from ROs are relatively freshwater, which can be used as process water for 
dyeing again. The final reject from RO contains high concentration of salt with other impurities. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2  Sequential Batch Reactor (SBR) for Biological Treatment 
 
 
 
 
        Figure 3  Reverse Osmosis   (RO)                                 Figure 4 Ultra Filtration (UF) 
 
5 
 
2.3 Salt Recovery 
 
The salt is recovered from RO rejects containing high salt contents (60-70 gpl).  The RO reject is 
further dewatered in multiple effect evaporator (MEE) in which steam is injected to raise 
temperature of RO reject. At the same time, a vacuum is created to lower the boiling point of the 
RO reject. The evaporated water is condensed and used as boiler make-up water or for other uses. 
When the feed RO reject is evaporated in multiple effect evaporator (Fig. 5), the concentration of 
salt is further increased but the salt remains in solution because of higher temperature. When the 
temperature is lowered, the excess salt above saturation points crystallizes and deposited at the 
bottom. The salt recovered by crystallization is drained to get the nearly pure salt for re-use.  
 
 
 
Figure 5  Multi-Effect Evaporator for Salt Recovery from  RO Reject 
 
The common salt can be recovered from electro-oxidized dye-bath discharge as brine by 
nanofiltration (NF). Nanofiltration allows monovalent salt like NaCl to pass through the 
membrane but not other impurities present in oxidized dye-bath. In this process the dye-bath 
containing high concentration on NaCl ranging from 30- 60 gpl (gram per litre) is collected 
separately from other effluent and subjected to electro-chemical oxidation in a specially designed 
oxy-cell reactors (Fig. 6).  
6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The high concentration of common salt helps generation of chlorine in the reactor to oxidize 
TOC, COD and part of BOD into gases and carbon dioxide (chlorine assisted electro catalytic 
oxidation called Cl-effect). Direct electrode oxidation (e-effect) also occurs in the reactor. The 
dyes molecules break down by electro oxidation and become colourless. The reject from NF is 
recirculated in the reactor as shown in Fig.10 and thus produces no liquor or sludge for disposal. 
The recovery is about 80% lower than the common salt.  
 
2.4 Treatment and Disposal of Sludge and Liquor 
 
The biological sludge is aerobically digested for reduction of organic load and volume. The 
primary chemical sludge and digested secondary sludge are dewatered by filter press into semi-
solid condition, which is finally disposed of in secured landfill. The liquor from the evaporator is 
dried by solar evaporation in shallow evaporation basin constructed within the compound of the 
treatment plant. The dried material is disposed in the secured landfill. A common secured landfill 
site can be installed in the area for the final disposal of sludges. The biological sludge can be used 
as fertilizer but the solids obtained by drying liquor cannot be used because of the high salt 
content of the dried materials.  
 
 
3.The Unit Processes 
 
The zero discharge concept in the treatment of textile dyeing can be attained by different unit 
processes. Since dyeing process discharges different types of effluent at different stages of 
dyeing, equalization is a common unit operation in all treatment units. The discharges are stored 
in a tank, at least for a period to complete a cycle of dyeing operations but most treatment units 
prefer a 24-hrs detention time. The mixing of the content of the tank is done to bring uniformity 
of the wastewater, which is achieved by occasional or continuous aeration. Aeration also helps to 
reduce temperature of the wastewater and keep the system aerobic. The four major unit processes 
are discussed in this section with process diagrams and their merits and demerits. 
 
Figure 6  Oxy-cell Reactor in a  dye-bath 
7 
 
3.1 Extended Aeration-RO-MEE System 
 
In this process, the removal of BOD and COD is achieved strictly by biological treatment through 
extended aeration. The process diagram is shown in Fig. 7. The waste water is collected in an 
equalizing tank with a detention time of about 12 hours. The wastewater from equalizing tank is 
transferred into a large aeration tank having a detention time ranging from 36 - 48 hours for 
aeration. The content from the aeration tank in settled in a clarifier and effluent is filtered through 
pressure sand (quartz) filter units while the settled sludge in recycled in the aeration tank to 
maintain certain level of mixed liquor suspended solids (MLSS). The sand filters remove 
suspended solids to avoid fouling of RO system. The fresh water from the filtered effluent is 
recovered by RO system while the RO rejects is evaporated in MEE system to recover salt. 
 
 
Figure 7  Extended Aeration-RO-MEE System 
De
wa
ter
ed
 S
lud
ge
 
3-
sta
ge
 R
O 
Multi-Stage 
Evaporation 
Dried Solids 
RO-1 
RO-2 
RO-3 
Filter Press 
Fil
tra
te
 re
cir
cu
lat
ion
 fo
r T
re
at
me
nt 
Reject for drying 
Sludge 
REUSE 
Equalizing Tank 
Combined Effluent 
Biological Reactor 
Secured Landfill 
Fresh Water 
Tank 
Settling Basin 
Filtration 
8 
 
Advantages 
 The system is simple, some of the unit processes/operations like coagulation-flocculation 
is avoided; 
 The process is complete biological, there is minimum use of chemicals resulting in the 
production of very small quantity of sludge; 
 High removals of  BOD and COD are achieved due to long time aeration in the aeration 
tank. 
 The operating cost of the system is comparatively low. 
 
Disadvantages 
 A large area of the treatment plant is required because of long detention time in the 
aeration tank. 
 Biological treatment has little effect on colour - coating of bio-flocs by colour pigments 
might have adverse effect on biological growth and efficiency of biological treatment; 
 The system operates on low MLSS, which delays BOD removal but decaying of bacterial 
cells during extended aeration produce very little excess sludge for disposal; 
 Coloured effluent from the treatment system might have adverse effect on RO system 
and the highly concentrated RO reject might affect the quality of the salt recovered in the 
MEE system.  
 Biological methods are very sensitive to operating conditions. 
 
 
3.2 Electro-coagulation-SBR-RO-MEE System 
 
The unit operations in the system include equalization, electro-coagulation, biological treatment 
in suspended batch reactor (SBR), chemical coagulation aided by ozone oxidation, sand and 
granulated activated carbon (GAC) filtration, UF, RO for water recovery and MEE for salt 
recovery (Fig. 8). Electro-coagulation removes colour, suspended solids, and partly removes and 
destroys COD. The reduction of COD brings the BOD : COD ratio to a value more favourable for 
biological treatment. The SBR system requires minimum detention time to remove BOD and 
COD (about 6 hrs. as compared to minimum 36 hrs in case of extended aeration) because of 
maintenance of very high MLSS level. As a result smaller size reactors are needed. Since the 
content of one tank is allowed to settle down while the other is aerated, the SBR system 
eliminates the requirement of a subsequent clarifier. A subsequent coagulation and oxidation 
system removes suspend solids and colour produced during biological treatment. The effluent 
from this system is very clear with low BOD and COD but it is further treated by sand and 
activated carbon filtration to remove any residual suspended solid and volatile organic matters. 
The salt and water is now separated in multi-stage RO system, the water (RO recovery) is used as 
process water while the concentrated residual influent (RO reject) is further dehydrated in MEE 
system to recover salt. The liquor from MEE is dried in solar evaporator. The biological excess 
sludge requires aerobic digestion to reduce volume. The aerobic digested sludge and chemical 
sludge are dewater in filter press for disposal (Fig. 8).  
 
9 
 
Advantages 
 The units are compact and space requirement for is low as compared to complete 
biological treatment; 
 Electrochemical process produces reduced quantity of chemical sludge because of 
reduction in the use of chemical; 
 High degree of treatment is achievable within a short period. 
 
Disadvantages 
 Electrochemical flocs are microflocs of low density and require electrolyte to improve 
the size of flocs for better  separation by sedimentation; 
 The  quantity of secondary (biological) sludge produced in SBR system is comparatively 
higher and the sludge requires further digestion for volume reduction and improve 
dewaterability by filter press or cyclone; 
 
 
Figure 8 Electro-coagulation-SBR-RO-MEE System 
De
wa
ter
ed
 
Sl
ud
ge
 
Re
jec
t fo
r D
ryi
ng
 
Multi-Stage 
Evaporation 
Dried Solids 
Filter Press 
Fi
ltra
te
 re
cir
cu
lat
ion
 fo
r T
re
at
me
nt 
Sludge 
Equalizing Tank 
Combined 
Effluent 
Biological Reactors 
Secured Landfill 
Fresh Water 
for Reuse 
UF 
RO-1 
RO-2 
Recovered 
Salt for 
Reuse 
Sludge 
Digestion 
GAC Filtration 
Coagulation 
10 
 
 Comparatively higher capital cost and operating cost for higher consumption of electrical 
energy. 
 
3.3  Chemical coagulation-Aeration-RO-MEE System 
 
The system includes separation of dye-bath discharge from wash waters and effluents from other 
operations of dyeing process and treatment of segregated wastewater in two parallel processes 
(Fig. 9). The dye-bath effluent is high in salt content (about 60 gpl) is subjected to chemical 
coagulation-sedimentation and the effluent is directly transferred to MEE for salt recovery. The 
remaining wastewater of lower salt content ( 2-3 gpl) is subjected to elaborate treatment like 
chemical coagulation, biological treatment (aeration), tertiary treatment (Sand and GAC 
filtration), multi-stage RO for water recovery  and finally MEE of RO rejects  for salt recovery. 
The RO rejects has similar salt concentration as dye-bath discharge and suitable for salt recovery 
by MEE. Since the dye-bath discharge is not subjected to biological treatment, the dye-bath  
 
 
 
 
Figure 9 Chemical coagulation-Aeration-RO-MEE System 
Ch
em
ica
l 
co
ag
ula
tio
n 
Ch
em
ica
l 
Co
ag
ula
tio
n 
De
wa
te
re
d 
Sl
ud
ge
 
3-
sta
ge
 R
O 
Cl
ar
ifie
r 
Ca
rif
ier
 
Multi-Stage 
Evaporation 
Dried Solids 
Secured Landfill 
RO-1 
RO-2 
RO-3 Fresh Water for Washing / Scraping 
Filter Press 
Fi
ltra
te
 re
cir
cu
lat
ion
 fo
r T
re
at
me
nt 
Reject for drying 
Sludge 
Clarified Water 
Wash 
Waters 
Dye-bath 
Discharge 
Equalizing    Tanks 
Recovered 
Salt for 
Reuse 
11 
 
effluent with high BOD load is subjected to MEE dehydration. It is claimed that the higher BOD 
and COD of the chemically treated dye-bath wastewater do not interfere with the MEE process.  
The liquid from MEE after salt recovery is dried in the sun, stored in secured landfill. 
 
Advantages 
 Since the dye-bath discharge of high salt content is separated from wastewaters of low 
salt content,  the RO recovery from the wastewater stream of low salt content is better; 
 Treatment of wash and other wastewaters with low pollution load and colour is easier for 
chemical and biological treatment; 
 The unit operations for the treatment of dye-bath wastewater are minimum, which results 
in lower cost of testament. 
 
Disadvantages 
 Separate collection of wastewater form dyeing operations and conveyance by separate 
drains are difficult and need proper training of operators. Two channels of treatment need 
larger space. 
 MEE of partially treated dye-bath effluent with high organic load may cause scaling, 
which may interfere with heat transfer.  
 
3.4 Electrochemical-Electro coagulation-Membrane Filtration-MEE System 
  
The system includes complete separation and collection of wastewater from scouring-bath, dye-
bath and different washes in three different stabilizing tanks and application of treatment 
depending on the type of wastewater (Fig.10). The wastewater from scouring requires simple 
chemical coagulation to clean the water, the dye-bath wastewater having the highest 
concentration of polluting substances is subjected to electro-oxidation in two oxycell reactors. 
The eletro-oxidation of oxygen demanding wastes is achieved by dual effects - electrode 
oxidation (e-effect) and chlorine assisted electro catalytic oxidation ( Cl-effect). The chlorine is 
generated by electrolysis of common salt present in high concentration in dye-bath discharge.  
The process breaks down the synthetic dye molecules to non-coloured end products and causes 
drastic reduction of COD. This method is quite advanced and innovative in its application. The 
electro-oxidized water is subjected to UF and the NF as shown in Fig. 8 to separate saltwater 
from other impurities. The salt water is collected in a tank, which is suitable for use in dye-bath. 
The reject is re-circulated in the oxycell reactor and the process does not produce any sludge. 
 
The wash waters are treated by electro-coagulation to remove suspended solids, colour, COD and 
some BOD. Electro-coagulation is accomplished in two simple reactors using mild steel rods as 
sacrificing electrodes (Fig.10). Electo-coagulation as discussed in section 3.2 is done by patented 
device, which uses 3mm thick mild steel plates as electrodes.  The coagulated water is flocculated 
in baffled channel with addition of electrolyte to increase floc size and then settle in clarifiers. 
The effluent is subjected to 3-stage RO for the recovery of water and reject is evaporated in 
MEE. No salt is recovered from MEE process but the evaporated water is used as boiler make-up 
water. The RO reject can also be dehyrated in solar evaporator. 
 
Advantages 
 The system is very compact and can be accommodated in small spaces. 
12 
 
 Advanced innovated technologies have been used in the process; development of 
appropriate electrodes is key of the system; 
 The use of chemicals is minimum. so the quantity of sludge produced for disposal is also 
low. 
 
Disadvantages 
 Consumption of electricity is relatively high. 
 The system does not have any biological treatment; the electrochemical treatment cannot 
reduce BOD to low level. High BOD may promotes bacterial growth to cause membrane 
fouling of RO system.  
 
 
 
Figure 10 Electrochemical-Electrocoagulation-Membrane Filtration-MEE System 
El
ec
tro
ch
em
ica
l T
re
atm
en
t 
El
ec
tro
-co
ag
ula
tio
n 
Ch
em
ica
l C
oa
gu
lat
ion
 
De
wa
ter
ed
 S
lud
ge
 
3-
sta
ge
 R
O 
Cl
ar
ifie
r 
Ca
rif
ier
 
Multi-Stage 
Evaporation 
UF 
NF 
Dried Solids 
Secured Landfill 
RO-1 
RO-2 
RO-3 Fresh Water for Reuse  
Saline Water 
for Reuse 
Filter Press Fi
ltra
te
 re
cir
cu
lat
ion
 fo
r T
re
at
me
nt 
Re
jec
ts 
 fo
r R
ec
irc
ula
tio
n 
Reject for drying 
Sludge 
Clarified Water 
Water from Scraping Dye-bath Drain 
Wash Waters 
13 
 
 Chlorinated organics are environmental hazards, some chlorine generated in the oxycells 
may escape in the air, which is likely to cause occupational hazard for the operator. 
 The recovered brine contains some volatile organic acids formed during electro-oxidation 
process, which may promote microbial growth to make the brine unsuitable for reuse, if 
stored for long time. 
 
4. Discussion 
 
The zero discharge ETP is basically a two stages plant that includes treatment of the wastewater 
to a high level, and then recovery of water and salt from the effluent. Management of solid and 
semi-solid waste is also made within the plant and as a result practically nothing comes out of the 
plant. In Bangladesh, zero discharge is not a requirement of the government and most plant with 
some degree of treatment can meet the BOD and COD requirements for discharge. Since, salt 
cannot be removed by any chemical/biological treatment, the total dissolved solid (TDS) or 
electrical conductivity (EC) exceeds the requirement. Some treatment plants dilute the effluent 
with fresh water to reduce TDS or EC to acceptable level. Zero discharge ETP provides ultimate 
solution to the severe pollution problem from textile dyeing in Bangladesh. All textile industries 
pump a huge quantity of water and pollute it. Recycling of water in zero discharge plants help 
conservation of water. The recovery of salt from waste stream for reuse is an incentive for the 
industries to implement zero discharge plant. 
 
The drying up of the liquor from MEE in solar evaporator is a constrained for adoption of the 
technology in Bangladesh. Firstly, it is difficult for most of the dyeing factory to get enough 
space for installation of solar evaporation pan. Secondly, rainfall and humidity in about 5 months 
of the year will interfere into evaporation in open pans. Solar distillation in pans covered with 
transparent sheet or glass is a possible alternative for drying up of the liquor but the process is 
very slow as compared to open evaporator. Recirculation of the liquor by feeding it in the 
equalizer is an alternative but it will increase the load on the the treatment plant. The possibility 
of recirculation of this liquor may eliminate the need for installation of evaporator but its effect 
on the overall system needs further evaluation. 
 
The dried and semi-solid solids wastes have to be disposed of in the landfill. The requirement of 
a secured landfill in Bangladesh can be assessed by studying the leaching characteristics of the 
sludge in the laboratory. Percolation of highly saline leachate from these type of waste is 
inevitable and as such some shorts of confinement of the disposed-of waste will be required to 
avoid groundwater pollution. Due to scarcity of land, most factories will have to establish 
landfills outside the factory area. 
 
5. Conclusions 
 
The zero discharge option for management of textile dyeing wastewater may appear to be a too 
stringent option at this stage for Bangladesh, but it is the ultimate solution to the problem. The 
zero discharge ETPs are costly but recovery of salt for reuse is a financial incentive for 
implementation the treatment option. Many buyer care for the environment and are ready to pay 
more for products manufactured in environment friendly industries. Some of the advanced 
technologies used in zero discharge option are still in experimental stage and need time for 
standardization. All dyeing industries in Bangladesh must install effective ETPs first to comply 
14 
 
with the national EQS and then upgrade the ETPs in steps to improve effluent quality and finally 
may go for zero discharge option depending on availability financial resources. 
 
References 
 
Environmental Conservation Act (ECA), 1995, Ministry of Environment and Forest, Government 
of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh 
Environmental Conservation Rule (ECR), 1997, Ministry of Environment and Forest, 
Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh 
 
15 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh   
 
 
 
TIPS FROM EXPERIENCE 
 
 
Dr. Md. Monjur Hossain1  
 
 
1.  SPT Value 
 
Sub-soil investigation is a predominant feature in designing foundation of important structure in 
an intelligent, economic and satisfactory way. It provides the necessary information of strength 
and compressibility characteristics of the sub-soil to the design engineer for selection of suitable 
depth and type of foundation for the proposed structure. Both results of field and laboratory 
investigations are essential to obtain necessary information in this regard. for this purpose the 
standard penetration test (SPT) is currently the most popular and economical means to obtain 
subsurface information. But simple thing if un noticed in the field may give incorrect N-value. 
The passage of steel ball sometime gets choked due to debris in the soil. Then water above soil 
column within barrel gets blocked. During dropping of hammer this water can not pass fully and 
instantly through water port. As a result phenomenon of pushing an annular open end tube 
changes to pushing a hammer having  full area of sampler. This will increase N value count than 
normal.  
Conclusion:- The operator should check every time so that the steel ball in the passage does not 
get blocked and upper within the SPT barrel is almost filled with sample. 
 
2. Pile Cap 
 
In most case the distance between piles in the pile cap & pile cap depth exhibits the phenomenon 
of deep beam. Designers consider the cap as flexural member resulting large quantity of 
reinforcing bar. 
   Strut and tie model gives economic solution. The bending and shearing forces are negligible, 
requiring only the minimum proportion of steel in two directions at the bottom of the cap as 
required by the relevant code of practice. 
Conclusion:-Strut and tie model gives economic solution. 
 
3. Violation of Code 
 
ACI moment and shear coefficients are generally followed by designers for spans two or more.  
                                                
1 Professor, Department of Civil Engineering, Khulna University of Engineering & Technology, Khulna-
9203  
16 
 
For the case of unequal spans & loads in a continuous beam some designers do not follow code 
limitations. For a typical beam (shown below), some designers will over estimate the negative 
moment (ranging from 7.6% to 286% ) or underestimate the negative moment (ranging from 15% 
to 43%. The variation in positive moment is erratic (from +144% to -16%). Designer should not 
approximate at his own mind set resulting unsafe or over design. 
 
                             
 
 
4. Slab Thickness 
 
ACI Code 9.5.2  specifies minimum thickness of non-prestressed one-way slab  l/20(for simply 
supported), l/24(one end continuous), l/28(both end continuous), l/10 (cantilever) of normal 
weight concrete, 145 pcf, using Grade 60 reinforcement. For concrete unit weight from 90 to 120 
pcf the value should be multiply by (1.65-.005 Wc) but not less than 1.09. For reinforcement other 
than fy= 410 N/m2 (Grade 60), value of fy multiply by .4+fy/685. Therefore, for Fy= 500 Mpa., 
multiply by(.4+500/685 =) 1.13. When both lighter aggregate (say wc=120 pcf) and higher grade 
steel (say Fy= 500 Mpa) is used slab thickness as obtained above needs to be multiplied by 1.23. 
For concrete of brick aggregate 90% weight of stone aggregate can be used. 
 
5. Use 500 grade steel 
 
Although steel constitutes only a few percent, it is a major cost factor. Interest of using this grade 
is primarily due to relief of congestion particularly in buildings assigned a high seismic design 
category. Deformed bar of fy>410N/mm2 permitted if that corresponds to a strain of 0.35 percent. 
fu/fy ≥10% for Grade 500, and for other lower grades fu/fy ≥15%. For seismic design actual fy≤ 
specified fy+125N/mm2.  And (Actual ultimate tensile stress)/(actual fy)>=1.25 
 
6. Effects of Induced Vibrations on Early Age Concrete  
 
During the setting process, fresh concrete may be exposed to vibrations from a variety of sources: 
earthquakes, heavy traffic, pile driving, or vibratory soil compactors. During the setting process, 
bonds are being formed in the cement matrix; therefore, vibration might cause damage to those 
bonds and result in a reduction of attainable strength. Without understanding of the impact of  
17 
 
 
  
 
 
 
18 
 
these vibrations before, during, and right after the setting period any concrete failure may be 
incorrectly attributed to the concrete producer. This should not be acceptable. 
     Hulshizer tested effects of blast vibrations through soils upon fresh and maturing concrete. The 
study consisted of specimens exposed to blast vibrations at 3, 6, 8, 14, or 24 h. He found that the 
average effect on shear strength for all of the combinations of exposure was a drop of 4%. He also 
found that the average effect on bond strength was a drop of 3%. Of all compression test results. 
the specimens that experienced the greatest decrease of 28-day strength were those exposed at 3 h 
after casting, which is the only time that corresponds to the selling period. Those specimens ex-
hibited a 7% loss of strength. 
     Dunham et, all, carried out experiment considering age as first variable **The ages at which 
groups of cylinders were vibrated were 2, 3.5, 4.5, 5, and 6 h after water-cement contact. These 
ages ensured that at least one group would be exposed to vibration in each or the following age 
ranges: before initial set, during the setting process, and after final set. Some age they considered 
are less than previous authors. 
     Second variable they selected was, peak particle velocity, to determine the effect that different 
magnitudes of vibration have on concrete strength. The frequency of that used in the experiment 
was 60 Hz. The lower level  of vibration used in this study corresponds to particle velocities of 
approximately 50-100 mm/s (2-4 in/s) and the higher level corresponds to particle velocities of 
approximately 200-300 mm/s (8-12 in./s). 
     Final variable, duration of vibration, explored whether length of vibration affects the 
compressive or splitting tensile strength of concrete. Durations of 1 and 2 min were used. 
     Results of their laboratory study indicate that vibration should not be considered a significant 
hazard to foundation strength as long as the vibrations are within the limits of their study 
 
7. Steps for Quality Concrete 
 
We have now stepped into a new millennium where science and technology in civil engineering 
fields have improved tremendously. This has made possible economic construction work of 
higher quality, which are also safe and durable. Concrete plays one of the most important parts in 
the construction industry. Flaws in concrete construction process if correctly recognized and 
timely corrected it is possible to achieve quality concrete. 
     Checking and correcting of the following points are to be carried out before commencement 
and/or during the concrete work : 
     Flaws :-Trial mix design, size and shape of coarse aggregate, fineness modulus and salinity of 
fine aggregate, proper size screens for coarse and fine aggregate, re-bar quality, water quality - 
salinity & turbidity, water measuring bucket for mixer, water/cement ratio, slump, quantity of 
cement in one bag. Initial and final setting time of cement.  Accuracy of measurement box for 
feeding materials to mixer machine. Capacity of mixer machine and number of mixer machine for 
the volume of concrete to be poured.  Mixing time of concrete.  Placement of re-bar and proper 
binding. Proper cover to the  re-bar. Number of vibrator for compaction of concrete. If due 
importance is not given to above mentioned points along with compaction and timely curing 
concrete produced is of poor quality. Poor quality concrete is porous resulting corrosion of 
reinforcement within 10 years after construction. 
     A table is shown which relates carbonation time (years) to the water/c8ment ratio for various 
depths of cover(mm) . This table applies to ordinary Portland cement. 
 
19 
 
 
Cover (mm)        
Water/cement  '"5  10  15  20  25  30  
Ratio        
0.45  19  75  100+  100+  100+  100+  
0.50            6 25  50  99  100+  100+  
0.55              3  12  27  49  76  100+  
0.60  1.8  7  16  29  45  65  
0.65  1.5  6  13  23  36  52  
0.70  1.2  5  11  19  30  43  
 
8. Deterioration of Concrete  
 
Faulty design, poor construction practice, use of impure material, corrosion of reinforcement and 
other usual occurrence of drying shrinkage, thermal stress, chemical reaction etc are main cause 
of deterioration of concrete. Concrete inherently provides a highly alkaline environment for the 
steel which protect and passivates the steel against corrosion. Corrosion of steel and 
accompanying distress can result if the concrete is poor and /or if the structure is not properly 
designed for the anticipated environment. 
 
9. Investigations of Concrete Structure  
 
The investigation is finding of reasons for the damage. Gathering information by observation, 
studying records, asking questions, supplemented by testing (if necessary) & thus conclude.The 
texture of concrete surface may suggest the possibility of chemical attacks by general softening, 
leaching of the matrix. Rust strains often indicate corrosion of reinforcement. It may also be due 
to contamination of aggregate with iron pyrites. Crack pattern may be informative. Records of 
mix proportion. Source of materials, strength test result, may be available for old/new structures. 
Investigation should make clear whether the rehabilitation work will mainly consist of repairing 
concrete damage or intended to strengthen the deteriorated elements. 
 
10. Crack Pattern May be Informative 
 
A mesh pattern crack suggests the formation during shrinkage. Relatively straight cracks usually 
indicate excessive but fairly uniform tensile strain. Cracking caused by unidirectional bending 
will be widest in the zone of maximum tensile stress and will taper along their length. Cracks 
caused by direct tension will be of at highly uniform width. And pop out in concrete are usually 
associated with particles of coarse aggregate just below the surface. 
 
11. Repair of Concrete Structure General   
 
Polymer use, epoxy (grout, mortar, injection) can be used for repair work. Latex modified 
concrete or mortars, dry packing (hand placing of low water content mortar) short-Crete or gun 
tic(mortar) or Concrete conveyed through a pressure hose and applied pneumatically as high 
velocity on to a surface is also used when facilities available. Ferro cement (combination of 
ferrous product with cement) is used as the rehabilitation material and seems to be the most 
20 
 
appropriate in the context of Bangladesh. It is possibly the single method which can be applied 
for mending the wide spectrums of damage of slab, beams columns walls etc 
 
12. Retrofitting &Repairing by Ferro Cement 
 
12.1.  Introduction 
 
The life of reinforced concrete is limited by the life of reinforcing bars. The steel bars embedded 
in the concrete are susceptible to corrosion leading to loss of cross- sectional area and strength 
unless soundly protected by a concrete cover of adequate thickness in good quality. Lack of 
importance given to this essential requirement is very common in our construction industry. 
Concrete is very durable, but durability of reinforcement is essentially dependent on protection 
from corrosion, which is not been cared. The vulnerability is aggravated if brick chips are used as 
coarse aggregate since they can soak water up to 20% of its own weight compared to only 3 to 5% 
in case of stone chips or gravels. Corrosion is also aggravated by chemical environment of which 
salinity is most common. 
     Reinforcing bars once rusted loses cross sectional area and therefore strength. A more serious 
and compounding factor is that the products of surface rusting is more voluminous than the parent 
metal and this causes the thin concrete cover to crack, burst & spall off affecting the very integrity 
of the bi-component structural member. Surface bond between the two materials is required to 
transfer stress from one to the other and lastly, in the severely rusted state the bond and the 
capacity of stress transfer is reduced or lost. So in advance stage of rusting the reinforcing bar & 
concrete loses its property and in reality becomes concrete and rebars juxtaposed side by side & 
becomes useless in resisting loads. Concrete  members thus suffered by rusting & loses of 
strength in various degrees results cracking & spalling & even cause failure. It invariably poses an 
ugly scene & psychological distress to the users.  
     Repair & retrofitting of degenerated reinforced concrete members is therefore being called for 
on a large scale and there is requirement of designing and devising method of sound, fool-proof 
repair or retrofitting operation. To save the trouble of wholesale dismantling; and in convenience 
of alternative temporary settlement of users for construction period, the choice of option between 
replacement by new construction/repair and retrofitting is a matter of decision by the owner 
depending on his parameters. 
 
12.2.  Design & Precaution 
 
The repair works requires removal of degenerated concrete cover in entirety, removal of corroded 
re-bars & replacement by new rebars. Ideally, the member should be jacked up tightly to relieve 
the stress and strain due to service load before grafting of new concrete. The props (with enlarged 
head) shall be closely spaced so that stress in the shaved state is kept low. For controlling the 
height of jacking up which will be different along the span, tight threads at 2 ft spacing flying 
over and parallel to the top surface may be set up and height readings from top of  slab to thread 
are taken & recorded. The new re-bars should be determined working stress design method and 
allowing low service stress may be 35% of the yield strength. 
     The beams shall be supported by props at close spacing before shaving is started. In case of 
column it is very difficult to relieve the entire load. This requires placing of number of stout props 
21 
 
engaging the supported beam ends in a slant direction the bottom of props sitting on underlying 
adjacent column foundation. 
     Before grafting concrete is placed the shaved surface shall be thoroughly prepared. For this 
purpose, surface shall be scrubbed by stiff steel wire brash to remove any loose aggregate or 
adherent mortar on concrete or exposed re-bars. Then the surface shall be treated with potable 
water in order that it is completely saturated. This may take 8 to 10 hours. The saturated  surface 
to be allowed to become surface dry through evaporation. Next cement grout shall be splashed not 
more than 15 minutes before being covered by grafting concrete. For this reason grouting shall be 
done in small batches covering small area ahead of progress of casting grafting concrete. The 
thickness of grafting concrete shall be more than codal requirement, even ¼ to 1/2 inch greater 
than higher codal requirement for saline or chemical environment. Very rich concrete mix using 
cement proportion say 25 bags per 100 cft concrete shall be used in case of saline or chemical 
environment. Stone chips shall be used as coarse aggregate in all cases. The size of the coarse 
aggregate shall be less than 3/8” downwards. 
     In case corroded stirrups call for new replacement, stirrup installations may be difficult. In that 
case 2 part U shaped stirrups may be lap splice or lap welding. Vertical hole in top of slab near the 
beam edge will be necessary. Water proofing admixtures shall be used where the concrete may be 
subjected to damp environment, particularly around the bathroom & where two adjacent slabs at 
top roof are separated be expansion joint or due to any other circumstantial need. 
 
12.3  Methodology 
 
12.3.1.  Slabs 
Shaving cum grafting work in ceiling involving removal of old concrete cover, grafting of new 
cement concrete cover working from bottom, using power hammer for ripping off the old concrete 
cover in order that old reinforcement bars are exposed but not loosened or dislodged from 
position, removal of rusted rebars which has lost 5% or more of cross-sectional area and placing 
new rebars for replacement of removed bars and/or making up of any existing deficiency as per 
design calculation, which shall be secured properly to existing rebar by tack welding or provided 
with 50 bar diameter lap splice. Before the grafting work is started, the surface shall be prepared 
by first cleaning the surface of concrete and of exposed rebars of loose adherent mortar of rusted 
binding wire, using stiff steel wire brush thereafter soaking with water to saturation by blasting 
water for 8 hours minimum thereafter giving a break of 30 minutes for allowing the surface to 
become surface dry through evaporation. 
     This item include rigid steel shutter formwork, tight propping props. The shutter is to be done 
in narrow strips to be added one after another along with the progress of concrete filling, keeping 
the next annexable strip along with its props fit and ready so that the entire time for filling fixing 
of from props & bracing including resumption of concrete filling work does not exceed 30 
minutes. The filling in any individual strip shall be completed when the edge of the strip shutter is 
reached at bottom with top of fill sloped back according to angle of repose. Before joining of the 
concrete fill of the annexed strip with earlier placed concrete, cement grouting shall be applied. 
     The width of steel shutter shall be selected according to convenience of placing and 
consolidating concrete and this depends on the gap between shutter and shaved ceiling which is 
about 1 .5 inch. The width shall not be less than 6 inch nor more than 18 inch. The shutter shall be 
coated with form-oil as per manufacturer’s instructions. Concrete shall be in 1:1.5:2.5 mix using 
1/2 inch down grade stone chips as coarse aggregate and a mixture of 85% Sylhet sand of FM 
22 
 
2.30 minimum & 15% medium sand of FM 1.30 minimum as fine aggregate. Plasticizer shall be 
used, as per manufacturer’s instructions. The intensity to be used shall be on the higher side of the 
permitted range. SIKA plastiment-BV/40, 0.30% by weight of cement or approved equal may be 
used. Virgin propylene fibers shall be admixed following manufacturers instructions. 
     The length of the strips shall be oriented generally in the direction of binder rebars so that the 
concrete filling & rod poking for consolidation can be done in the direction of main bars of slab. 
     The edges of the shutter shall be straight so that the butting joints of successively placed strip 
shutter are leak proof Thin paper shall be caulked in if there is leakage through joints in spite of 
all precautions The slump should be controlled for successful filling & consolidation The progress 
of annexing of streep shutter shall be withheld before the last strip near the edge of the panel is 
reached leaving one or two strips to be done This is because of the last strip of the panel has to be 
filled working from the opposite direction & space must be provided for it If more than one strip 
width is kept withheld then after filling the last strip in the original direction of progress, more 
strips as required leaving one strip vacant has to b filled from the opposite direction as in lat strip. 
Now when the vacant strip whose width shall be narrow, say 6 inch remain to be filled in the 
length of piece shutter shall be divided into three parts one centre part whose length is equal to 
width of the shutter 6” thus making it squarish and two half length shutter, length being half of the 
total length less 3 inch. The two overly half length shutters shall be first be fitted in position. After 
the filling of two nearly half length shutters is completed, the central small squarish area shall be 
filled by multiple layers of plaster of concrete. In this portion 1/4 inch down stone chips may be 
used as coarse aggregate. After the last layer of plastering is completed the central square shutter 
piece shall be pressed tight & propped. 
 
23 
 
If the repair area is not minor (e.g. greater than 2.5 sqft) then the sequence of repair work as 
follows 
 
 
24 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
12.3.2. Beam 
Shaving cum grafting work in sides & bottom of beam and girders including stripping of concrete 
cover to expose stirrup bars, removal of those stirrup and main bars found to have lost 5% or 
more of cross sectional area through corrosion including preparation of surface. The surface shall 
be prepared as in slabs. The items of the work including formwork which will be done in parts & 
concrete filling of each part shall be complete before the next part is annexed & filled in. The 
form for bottom shall have greater width than the existing width of beam and the excess on either 
side catering for extra thickness due to additional concrete to be placed at sides plus the thickness 
of shutter. The form shall be rigid plane & smooth on casting face. The supports, frame, props & 
staging shall be in steel & braced rigid by against away in any direction. Shuttering & concrete 
filling shall be done for bottom part first. The fill bottom edge shall stay clear of the edge of 
enlarged beam bottom so that there is no difficulty in placing of side shutter. The side shutter shall 
be in multiple strips in partial and small heights equal on both sides. The height of the upper parts 
shall be reduced gradually avoiding difficulty of placing concrete under very limited head room 
below ceiling The height of the lowest shutter part on each side shall be 6inch, Uppermost part 
shall be 1.5 inch height when clear head below ceiling above the uppermost one shutter is 3 inch. 
After filling the uppermost shutter the remaining 1 .5 inch height shall be grafted without aid of 
shutter i.e. plastering in multiple layers. The last layer shall be finished smooth by troweling. 
Each layer of the plaster shall be allowed to harden before successive layer of concrete plaster is 
applied. 
     The coarse aggregate used in concrete plaster shall be 1/4” down hard stone chips. Concrete 
used shall have admixture of plasticizer & fiber as the case of shaving cum grafting below ceiling. 
Curing shall be done as per standard method.  
26 
 
 
12.3.3.  Column 
Shaving cum grafting work in repair of column using the same method used in beam. Concrete 
shall have admixtures as in slabs & beams. The form work shall be planned & fitted in the same 
way as in new columns using steel shutters and supports and bracings to make form work rigid, 
leak proof and maintaining right angle between sides. The form shall be treated with form oil as in 
other items. 
     Height of shutter shall be in partial height. The first part shall be of normal height. The upper 
part shall be in heights equal to less than half the clear head room available after the previous 
shutter. The height of shutter parts will therefore be gradually reduced in height. The last height 
shall be 3 inch when the head room is 6 inch. The upper most 3 inch height will be cast in the 
manner described in repair of beam. 
 
 
27 
 
13. Small Thing Needs Large Checking to Clear Dispute 
 
13.1 Case 1 
An importer declared his consignment of 10MT as scrap material But custom authority charged 
him to pay tax for reconditioned leaf spring according to CRF issued by pre-shipment inspection 
(PSI) organization. 
     According to international custom organization leaf spring chiefly used in the suspension 
system of vehicles and scrap is from the manufacture or mechanical working of metals and metal 
goods not usable because of breakage, cutting up etc. Following steps were taken to settle the 
complain as consultant: 
     Stack of scrap was physically investigated in presence of custom and PSI representative. 
Length of iron pieces which were in stack of scrap were not of regular length (78 cm to 29cm). 
Average width 47 mm, average thickness 16.5 mm at cutting face & 8mm at end. Leaf springs of 
a truck were measured. They had constant with of 75 mm, constant thickness of 12 mm and of 
lengths not coincide with any of the iron pieces of scrap imported. Comparison done above makes 
it clear that any piece of consignment was not of leaf spring. Question of recondition did not arise 
at all.  
 
13.1.1 What they belonged to? 
Tapered shaped thickness puts doubt that pieces may be sheared from something of having 
tapered flange. Bottom flange of iron rails used in train line might be a source. Two old pieces of 
rails were collected and dimensions were cheeked. Where by it was seen that iron pieces are not 
leaf spring but cut pieces from bottom flange of rails. 
 
 
 
28 
 
 
 
 
29 
 
 13.2  Case 2 
 
A zilla parishad one story dukbunglow building was intended to extend one story more. 
Suggestion was requested as consultant.  
Steps taken were :-    
 
 
13.2.1 Physical observation of the exiting building  
 
1. Spalling of plaster from wall and concrete from ceiling at some places indicate that, standard of 
workmanship and materials used during the time of constructions of the building was not 
satisfactory.  
2. The walls are found to have cracked at different places in different ways.  
 
Horizontal crack in the north wall at lintel level showing wider width of crack in the west end is 
noticed and is likely to increase its width in course of time. There are cracks in other walls also 
(including bath room walls) generally at lintel level. Different walls in the kitchen block were 
found to show prominent cracks. These are horizontal crack approximating at lintel level.  
The nature of separation of surface drain apron from the wall indicated that the filled earth was 
not compacted properly.  
Conclusion: Settlement is apprehended to occur in the soil strata carryings the walls. Vertical 
extension as seen in the site will be unwise. Foundation was checked and it’s width  was 
sufficient for a single story  building . It was then decided to consult with local people to know 
previous condition of the plot. 
 
13.2.2 Interview with local people 
1. It was reported that the foundation trench of the building was excavated with very little or no 
depth of cutting in the original soil.  
Physical observation of the building condition 
Interview with local people 
Verification of filling Depth from measurement book (MB) 
Physical verification of soil 
Bearing capacity from unconfined compressive strength 
CONCLUSION 
30 
 
2. There were ditches very close to kitchen block.  
3. There was a natural drain close and parallel  to the north wall and north boundary. This channel 
was reported to be wider and deeper in the past than at present. At present the bottom of the 
channel is measured to be 4.25 ft below the PL. At the time of construction of the building it was 
deeper but gradually filled by garbage, rubbish etc.  
Conclusion: Walls resting on filled earth have settled. There is indication that the north side of the 
plot is lower than at the middle portion. Similarly the west side is lower than east side. It was 
thought to check measurement book to see depth of filling  at the commencement of  work.          
 
13.2.3 Verification of Filling Depth from measurement book (MB) 
From the study of measurement book along with a rough sketch as supplied it revealed that the 
depth of filling at north side is 3.5 ft, at west side is 3.5 ft; at south side is 3.0 ft and at east side is 
2.5 ft. From the natural slope of the area out side of north boundary wall it seems that the north-
west corner area is lower than 3.5ft. (say 4.5 ft.). Apron of the surface drain is 2 ft below the PL. 
This means that the original ground level before filling was at least 6.5 ft below the existing PL. 
In contrast to this the bottom of foundation is at 5.0 ft or 5 ft 4 in from the existing PL. Thus it 
seems that the north wall is floating on filled earth of depth 0 to 18 inch. From the similar 
analysis it seems that the major part of south wall and west wall of main building is not resting on 
original soil or the depth of cutting of foundation trench is negligible within the original soil.  
Conclusion: Many of  load bearing wall seem to be resting on filled earth and on the loose soil.  
 
13.2.4 Physical Verification of Soil  
Disturbed and undisturbed samples of soil from different locations around the buildings were 
collected which revealed following information:-  
 1. At south-west corner of the building loose earth of brown clay with mixture of rubbish was 
observed up to 6.5 ft below PL. The original soil is found to occur at about 7.25 ft. below the PL.  
 2. At north-west corner of the building very dark gray soft clay was encountered up to 6.75 ft 
from PL. Original soil of grayish brown color was found to occur at about 9.0 ft from PL.  
3. At west side of the building filled earth with mixture of rubbish was found to occur up to a 
depth of 5.5 ft from PL. Below this depth and up to the bottom of the boring grayish brown clay 
with silt having texture not similar to original soil was found.  
4.  At east side of the building  loose soil mixed with rubbish was found to occur up to a depth of 
about 5.25 ft from PL. Below this level original soil of brown clay with silt was found to occur.  
Conclusion: From the results of shallow boring in the specified locations it reveals that the bottom 
of the existing foundation is at higher level than the original ground in many locations. 
Observations above also indicate that the depth of soft soil under the foundation is not same at all 
places which results unequal amount of settlement for different walls. This differential settlement 
is likely to increase when the structure will anticipate higher load than at present. Under this 
circumstance vertical extension expected to aggravate the settlement non uniformly with a 
consequence of major damage in future.  
 
13.2.5 Study of soil Capacity from Unconfined Compressive Strength of Soil 
Unconfined compressive strength tests was conducted on samples collected from different 
locations around the existing building and at different depths blow filled earth within original 
ground. From 6.75ft to 9.25ft below PL unconfined compressive strength varied from 0.86tsf 
to 1.5tsf.  However, if the foundation would have been laid in the original soil vertical extension 
up to first floor with the existing foundation could have been possible .Dependable original soil, 
31 
 
for laying foundation in the site which can be uniformly adopted for the whole building seem to 
occur at 9 ft below the existing PL.  
 
14. Conclusion 
 
With existing foundation at its existing level vertical extension is not posible. 
 
References 
BNBC-93 
Arthur H. Nilson and George Winter, “ Design of concrete structure” 
M J Tomlinson, “ Pile design and construction practice”  
Prof. Dr. M. Shafiul Bari, “Use of 500 Grade Steel in the Design of Reinforced Concrete Slab” 
Engr. Subvash C Barua, “ Necessary Steps for Improvising  Quality and Economic Building 
Technology” 
Michael R. Dunham1; Adam S. Rush2; and James H. Hanson, P.E., M.ASCE3 , “Effects of 
Induced Vibrations on Early Age Concrete “, Journal of Performance of Constructed Facilities, 
©ASCE May/ June, 2007.  
 
32 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh   
 
 
 
 ECO-FRIENDLY BUILDING CONSTRUCTION TECHNOLOGY TO HANDLE 
CLIMATE CHANGE EFFECTS 
 
 
Mohammod Aktarul Islam Chowdhury1 
 
 
1.  Introduction 
 
Buildings and roads are the main entities of construction sectors that flourish civilization from 
time immemorial and the ancient history of mankind starts with the inception of worldly life of 
Adam and Eve (Hawa).  Adam, the Pioneer of Construction Technology constructed the first 
building of the earth Baitullah (House of Allah) in the Mecca of modern Saudi Arabia. In the 
course of time, construction is being associated with daily life of the mankind to survive in the 
natural environment meeting the basic needs housing, shelters, communication etc. Built 
environment in the form of constructing houses, buildings, roads, bridges, utility service 
infrastructures like pipe lines, tunnels, hydraulic structures like dams and reservoirs, mills, 
factories, industries etc. have the significant impacts on the natural environment. Building 
construction is the main organ of built environment.  
 
 
2. Unruly Climates Goes Badly Against Natural Human Environment 
 
Climate goes badly against natural human environment changing the natural setup on which the 
universe is established and made favorable the globe for the survival of mankind from the early 
age of the history. Regrettably due to slipshod and lack of cautiousness of men, natural system is 
being disturbed, disrupted, despoiled, degraded, defamed, deteriorated, corrupted, polluted, 
ruined, tarnished and infected for the long time collapsing the sustainability owing to unruly 
global climate change being happened unexpectedly by recent decades since 60s of the last 
century with rapid industrialization in the developed countries of the first world due to direct 
emission of green house gases (GHG) derived from carbon and carbon compounds to atmosphere 
without treatment or lack of adequate treatment that being added by fast industrialization of two 
new economic giants China and India who are not at all ready to reduce Green house gas 
emission with greatest GHG emitter the USA as expressed in Cope 09. Cancun Conference on 
climate change in 2010 and Durban Conference also ended in smoke to be consensus by the 
world countries to minimize the severe climate change effects due to GHGs emission generated 
not arithmetically but geometrically by leading GHGs emitters. Climate change is not only a 
social, an economic and a political concern but also a humanitarian issue because it will directly 
affect innocent victims and it is an ecological issue because of our anthropogenic interference 
with the Earth’s atmospheric and oceanic systems. Climate change involves impacts that will 
                                                        
1 Professor, CEE Department, SUST,  Sylhet, Bangladesh, aic_cee@yahoo.com 
33 
 
have consequences for people who are bystanders to economic affluence and consumption 
patterns. Extreme climatic events including flooding, sea level rise, storm impacts, drought, 
heatwaves and wildfires are projected for many regions around the globe (IPCC, 2007). The 
latest UN report on climate change says mankind is "very likely" to be the cause of global 
warming and predicts a rise in temperature of between 1.8-40C (3.2-7.20F) by 2100. Over the last 
century humans have begun to have a discernible ifluence on the earth's climate, causing it to 
warm (IPCC, 1996; IPCC, 1998). Since the beginning of the industrial age, the concentration of 
CO2 in the atmosphere has increased from 280 to 350 parts per million (Bazzaz and Fajer, 1992). 
The increase of CO2 in the atmosphere has been more rapid in recent years. The major reason for 
this increase may be attributable to the extensive use of fossil fuels, such as oil, coal and gas. The 
destruction of carbon sink by excessive land use and deforestation might be another important 
cause for the atmospheric CO2 increase over the last 100 years (Houghton, 1990). It has been 
projected from the historical data and simulation models that the CO2 level in the atmosphere will 
reach 600 ppm in the last half of this century (Stanley and Valett, 1991). The increase of CO2 and 
several other green house gases such as methane, nitrous oxide, chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) 
could cause an increase global temperature of about 4.2°C and possibly a change in precipitation 
patterns and amounts in some regions (Kimball et al., 1983). Global warming due to increasing 
concentrations of green house gases poses a threat to human society by changing the living and 
working environment to which society has adapted over many generations (Jodah, 1989). The 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) concludes that most of the warming 
observed over the last 50 years is attributable to human activities, and that anthropogenic climate 
change will persist for many centuries (IPCC, 2001). The built environment has an expected 
lifetime from 60 to more than 100 years. The potential implications of climate change on the 
building stock being built in Europe and other parts of the world over the next few decades 
should therefore be considered today. Extreme weather events remind of how vulnerable society 
is when faced with major climatic variations and severe weather conditions. Historically, large 
variations in local climatic impact have led to major variations in building practice throughout the 
world - often well suited to local climatic conditions. The question is to what extent men have 
rejected sound building traditions and practice in the quest for cost-effective solutions. The 
possible impacts of climate change are being explored by scientists in a wide range of disciplines. 
Until now, few studies have focused on the likely impacts of climate change on the built 
environment. A BRE study (Graves and Phillipson, 2000) shows that an increase in wind speeds 
of 6 % is likely to cause damage to 1 million buildings at a cost of £1-2 billion. During the life 
cycle of the construction phases green house gases especially carbon dioxides are emitted which 
causes severe climate change and subsequent effects in the natural environment. 
  
3.  Potential Effects of Climate Change on Building Construction Sectors 
 
The main impacts of climate change with implications for buildings are: 
 Increased energy consumption for air-conditioning due to higher temperatures  
 Health effects to occupants due to over-heating 
 Increased risk of damage from more intense tropical cyclones and storms and stronger winds, 
and from increased cracking of drier soils 
 Extreme weather events may disrupt transport for site deliveries and affect site work (e.g., 
muddy site conditions), restricting work-days 
 Infrastructure (e.g., drainage) affected by extreme weather events 
 Excessive heat in summer will affect some construction processes and onsite workforce 
34 
 
 Design standards may need to be clarified or upgraded in response to changing climate 
 Insurance may be more expensive or difficult to obtain for existing buildings, new buildings, 
and during the construction process; Insurance sector beginning to factor impacts of climate 
change into premiums. Sector has yet to put systems into place to discount climate-change 
related risk mitigation, but could be pushed to do so through building industry initiatives.  
 Increased cooling load is expected in many parts of the world. Increases in energy demand 
for summer cooling will be offset by decreased heating loads for locations in cooler climate 
zones. For office buildings, reduced heating loads in cooler climates are less significant due 
to the high internal loads from equipment and lighting 
 More frequent hot spells could have significant health implications because elevated 
temperatures over extended periods stress the cardiovascular system, especially when 
temperatures remain relatively high overnight. The temperatures people experience during 
hot spells will be influenced by the buildings they inhabit.  
 Temperature also affects the capacity to work. Fatigue increases at higher temperatures and 
people find it harder to concentrate and accidents are more likely to happen.  The threshold at 
which capacity to work and study begins to decrease depends on acclimation and type of 
work. 
 The risk of bushfires is expected to increase as the climate changes and this will increase the 
risk to property.  It should be noted, however, that severe bushfire frequency in any particular 
location is not likely to exceed one every fifteen years because of the time needed for fuel 
loads to rebuild. 
 Flooding, coastal erosion, subsidence are expected to become more frequent as the climate 
changes and the risk to buildings in some areas will increase. Obviously flooding, coastal 
erosion, subsidence, drainage systems require new building techniques and materials to 
withstand adverse weather conditions; influence the choice of site 
 Buildings can be vulnerable to climate change. In the future there may be an increase in the 
risk of collapse, declining health and significant loss of value as a result of more storms, 
snow or subsidence damage, water encroachment, deteriorating indoor climate and reduced 
building lifetime. In the short term stronger storms are the greatest challenge.  
 
At the same time, impacts of building construction activities on climate change are also obvious. 
Key impacts of construction activities on climate change are presented below. 
 
 The cement sector alone accounts for 5% of global man-made CO2 emissions.  
 Highest impact is the mining/manufacture of materials and chemicals.  
 Transport of heavy materials such as cement is energy-intensive, but most building materials 
tend to be sourced from close-by facilities.  
 The chemical processes and use of fuel/electricity account for the major portion of the 
sector’s CO2 emissions.  
 On-site construction of buildings is relatively low-impact, mainly energy use; influenced by 
choice of building materials, construction techniques, and modes/ distances of transportation.  
 The maintenance of buildings is higher impact due to significant energy use (esp. heating, 
lighting);  
 
New building regulations impact on requirements for maintenance and demolition.  
 
35 
 
Since many buildings erected today will still be in use in 40 – 60 years, it is therefore important 
to consider the likely effect of climate changes expected over this period on the structure and 
functionality of buildings being built now and should take the proper and adequate steps in this 
regard. 
 
4. What to be done to Minimize Climate Change Effects Associated with Buildings? 
 
In order to provide green housing and dwelling facilities minimization of climate change effects 
with buildings should be thought of systematically and methodically as follows. 
    
4.1  Key opportunities  
 
 New materials/ technologies: ex. Photo-catalytic coating, shotcrete, concrete ‘eco-
columns’  
 Sustainable Business Materials Exchange (see below)  
 Other adaptive responses – use of fuels, emissions trading, eco-design (reducing energy 
use in construction/maintenance stage of building)  
 Use of waste products for raw materials in fuels  
 
4.2 General strategies to address climate change in construction  
 
 Government taxation and regulation e.g. Tax breaks or rewards for energy efficiency; 
raised energy efficiency standards for construction and refurbishments; calls for 
increased transparency in property energy use which could effect valuations  
 Voluntary targets - Industry sets reporting metrics, individual companies set targets  
 Process/technology innovation  
 Switching to lower carbon fuels  
 Identifying alternative raw materials (e.g. lower clinker-content cement)  
 CO2 capture and sequestration (although very costly) Emissions trading  
 
4.3 Three  ways to reduce CO2 emissions leading low climate change effects 
 
4.3.1 Lower clinker content:  
50% of CO2 emissions occur during the process of producing an intermediate product called 
clinker. Reductions can be achieved by diluting the clinker content and grinding the cement finer 
to maintain 28 day strength. Problem: there is limited demand for low-clinker cement and 
customers may perceive it to be of lower quality. Since it should cut costs, we should ask 
companies why they do not use more of it?  
 
4.3.2 Increase fuel efficiency: 
 The wet process consumes nearly twice as much fuel as the precalciner process for each tonne of 
cement. However, changing the process is very expensive, and unlikely to be justified solely by 
fuel savings.  
 
 
 
36 
 
4.3.3 Alternative fuels 
Cement manufacturers use waste fuels, however, under the ETS, waste fuels are not favoured 
over conventional fuels except biofuels (wood chip and rice husks) which are hardly used by the 
industry.  
 
As the above actions to reduce CO2 emissions would also result in a reduction of major 
production costs (fuel and clinker content), it would be hoped that companies would pursue these 
avenues successfully. 
 
4.4 Adapting buildings to climate change 
 
It is the responsibility of individual building owners to see that applicable regulations are 
complied with, and it is also they who will seek solutions for satisfactory indoor climate. In the 
short term there will be no changes in the laws pertaining to building safety under extreme 
weather conditions. For countering heat waves, the new regulations regarding the energy 
framework in the building code represent a step towards promoting solar screening and heat-
deflecting windows, which will make it easier to regulate indoor climate. In the future, there may 
be a need to inform owners of existing buildings of the typical weaknesses in the bearing 
elements, with corresponding instructions on how to remedy them. In the same manner, there 
may be a need for instructions on new building solutions to reduce indoor temperature extremes 
during heat waves, especially for vulnerable buildings. Finally, there may be a need to inform 
construction technicians of recommended future-oriented design parameters, for example, 
concerning maximum snow load and wind speed, temperatures and durations of future heat 
waves and the maximum precipitation intensity a building should withstand. 
 
4.5 Development phase actions 
 
3.5.1 Design 
Actions required during the design phase are highly dependent and driven by the risks and 
opportunities identified in the feasibility and planning phase. Likely design issues include 
demonstrate as the building is/has: 
 
 Strong enough or able to be strengthened if wind speeds increase in the future; 
 Strong enough to avoid movements due to future levels of subsidence; 
 Drainage systems at entrance thresholds can cope with more intense rainfalls; and  
 Designed to reduce heat gains in summer and infiltration from increased wind and 
temperatures. 
 
4.5.2 Construction 
As the impacts of climate change intensify there may be consequences for the construction phase 
such as: 
 
4.5.2.1 Health and safety at the construction site 
With hotter and drier days, there are health and safety issues for builders / contractors and other 
building personnel as a result of the construction process. With more very hot days predicted, 
work disruption is likely to increase, potentially increasing building delays and costs. This 
37 
 
provides opportunities for different and improved construction practices that allow staff to keep 
working with extreme heat e.g: 
 Prefabrication and off-site construction 
 Provide shading and ventilation where appropriate 
 Manage delays through contractual agreements 
 Manage concrete placement to ensure the maximum strength and durability of concrete 
structures is maintained (CIRIA 2005). 
 
4.5.2.2 Costs of building products, material and transport 
Applied carbon charges will create winners and losers among building products and materials. 
Materials with large carbon footprints from greenhouse gas intensive manufacturing processes 
(see Risks : Supply Chain) or with long transport distances will likely become more expensive; 
Rising fuel prices and increased fuel scarcity (primarily oil, petrol and diesel) will increasingly 
incentivise developments with low transport distances for staff and production 
 
5. What to be done to ensure Eco-friendly Building Construction? 
 
To handle such bottlenecks in the development and construction phase in the building and 
housing sector, following measures and actions is of predominant importance:  
 
(a) Green Scapes program providing cost-efficient and environmentally friendly solutions for 
large-scale landscaping may be designed to help preserve natural resources and prevent waste and 
pollution, minimizing the associated impacts on land, water, air, and energy use (ORP, 2004). 
(b) Industrial Materials Recycling Program providing information on how industrial materials, 
such as coal combustion products, foundry sand, and construction and demolition debris, can be 
recycled to meet the material needs of the construction industry. Industrial materials can be 
recycled in construction applications because they have many of the same chemical and physical 
properties as the virgin materials they replace. In some cases, they can even improve the quality 
of a product. 
(c) Reducing and recycling construction and demolition (C&D) materials conserving landfill 
space, reducing the environmental impact of producing new materials, creating jobs, and 
reducing overall building project expenses through avoided purchase/disposal costs should be 
introduced. 
(d) Environmentally Preferable Purchasing Program aiming to make the environment a factor in 
central purchasing of all kinds of products, including building products should be introduced. 
(e) Department of Energy's  program promoting partnerships with homebuilders, office building 
managers, product manufacturers, and many other organizations to improve the energy efficiency 
of homes, buildings, and various building components and appliances should be initiated. 
(f) Bringing clean, reliable and affordable energy technologies to the marketplace 
(g) Indoor Air Quality (IAQ) (sometimes also referred to as Indoor Environmental Quality or 
IEQ) is a critical component of constructing "green" homes and buildings. EPA's Iendoor 
Environments Program offering several IAQ tools and programs designed to protect occupant 
health, promote comfort and productivity, and enhance the durability of structures should be 
designed in building professionals establish and maintain good indoor air quality. 
(h) Advanced Refrigeration Technology to help food retailers in reducing refrigerant charges and 
refrigeration emissions that harm the ozone layer and contribute to climate change should be 
introduced in every flats of the building. 
38 
 
(i) Optimize Site/Existing Structure Potential: Creating sustainable buildings starting with proper 
site selection, including consideration of the reuse or rehabilitation of existing buildings. The 
location, orientation, and landscaping of a building affect the local ecosystems, transportation 
methods, and energy use. Incorporate Smart growth principles in the project development 
process, whether it be a single building, campus or military base. Siting for physical security is a 
critical issue in optimizing site design, including locations of access roads, parking, vehicle 
barriers, and perimeter lighting. Whether designing a new building or retrofitting an existing 
building, site design must integrate with sustainable design to achieve a successful project. The 
site of a sustainable building should reduce, control, and/or treat storm-water runoff. 
(j) Optimize Energy Use: With the supply of fossil fuel dwindling, concerns for energy 
independence and security increasing, and the impacts of global climate change arising, it is 
essential to find ways to reduce load, increase efficiency, and utilize renewable energy resources 
in federal facilities. Improving the energy performance of existing buildings is important to 
increasing our energy independence. Government and private sector organizations must commit 
to net zero energy buildings in the next decade or so as a way to significantly reduce our 
dependence on fossil fuel. 
(k) Protecting and Conserving Water: In many parts of the world especially in the developing 
countries, fresh water is an increasingly scarce resource. From this point of view, a sustainable 
building should use water efficiently, and reuse or recycle water for on-site use, when feasible. 
(l) Use Environmentally Preferable Products: A sustainable green building may be constructed of 
materials that minimize life-cycle environmental impacts such as global warming, resource 
depletion, and human toxicity (FFC, 2001). Environmentally preferable materials that have a 
reduced effect on human health and the environment and contribute to improved worker safety 
and health, reduced liabilities, reduced disposal costs, and achievement of environmental goals 
should be used to the goal of eco-friendly sustainable green building . 
(m) Optimize Operational and Maintenance Practices: Considering a building's operating and 
maintenance issues during the preliminary design phase of a facility should be well considered 
that will contribute to improved working environments, higher productivity, reduced energy and 
resource costs, and prevented system failures. It should be appreciated to encourage building 
operators and maintenance personnel to participate in the design and development phases to 
ensure optimal operations and maintenance of the building. Designers should specify such 
materials and systems that simplify and reduce maintenance requirements; require less water, 
energy, and toxic chemicals and cleaners to maintain; and are cost-effective and reduce life-cycle 
costs. Additionally, design facilities should be provided to include meters in order to track the 
progress of sustainability initiatives, including reductions in energy and water use and waste 
generation, in the facility and on site. 
 
5.1 Specific Eco-friendly Construction Measures to Handle Climate Change Effects on 
Buildings 
 
In this regard, specific eco-friendly construction measures can give the best solution to handle 
climate change effects on buildings as follows.   
 
5.1.1 Eco-friendly buildings:  
Following model of eco-friendly buildings in urban and semi-urban areas can be well considered 
as shown in figure    
  
39 
 
  
Fig.1 Well planned green urban areas 
 
Fig.2  Gorgeous eco-friendly, multi-family 
home with sophisticated Park House compound 
 
5.1.2 Eco-friendly construction and green building materials:  
To have eco-friendly green urban areas, adequate supply of eco-friendly construction and green 
building materials are must.  Eco-friendly building materials include all materials used during the 
actual construction phase of the green building project. Included are all lumber, stone and brick 
materials used exterior and interior walls and support systems; flooring, decking, roofing, siding, 
insulation and windows; along with the paneling, finishing and other physical systems used to 
complete the building. Conventional Eco-friendly construction materials includes (1) Bamboo, 
bamboo based particle board & ply board, bamboo  matting, (2) Bricks sun dried, (3) Precast 
cement concrete blocks, lintels, slab, structural and non-structural modular elements, (4) Calcined 
Phospho Gypsum wall panels, (5) Calcium silicate boards and tiles, (6) Cellular light weight 
concrete blocks, (7) Cement paint, (8) Clay roofing tiles, (9) Water, polyurethane and acrylic 
based chemical admixtures for corrosion removal, rust prevention, water proofing, (10) Epoxy 
resin system, flooring, sealants, adhesives and  admixtures, (11) Ferro-cement boards for door 
and window shutters  (12) Ferro-cement roofing channels, (13). Fly-ash sand lime bricks and 
paver blocks, (14) Gypsum board, tiles, plaster, blocks, gypsum plaster fibre, jute/sisal and glass 
fibre composites, (15) Laminated wood plastic components, (16) Marble mosaic tiles, (17) MDF 
boards and mouldings, (18) Micro concrete roofing tiles (19) Partical boards, (20) Polymerised 
water proof compound, (21) Polymerised water proof compound, (22) Portland pozzolana cement 
both of flyash /calcined clay Based, (23) Portland slag cement, (24) RCC door frames, (25) 
Ready mix cement concrete, (26) Rubber wood finger joint board, (27) Stone dust, (28) Water 
proof compound, adhesive, polymer, powder etc.  
 
5.1.2.1 Eco-friendly Materials for the Building Exterior:  
Eco-friendly materials for building exterior includes: 
- Foundation materials such as stone or concrete sourced from local suppliers when possible; 
- Green-certified framing materials or use reclaimed wood (locally sourced where available); 
- Siding material derived from sustainable sources and enhances the energy efficiency of the 
structure; 
- Roofing systems using either metal, sustainable wood, recycled rubber tiles or use a “green 
roof; 
- Decking using composite or recycled plastic boards; reclaimed wood or new wood from 
sustainable vendors. 
40 
 
5.1.2.2 Eco-Friendly Building Materials for Interior Construction:  
Eco-friendly materials for building interior construction includes: 
- Interior wall materials such as green gypsum board, green plywood, clay/lime plaster, bamboo, 
cork, palmwood, etc.; 
- Flooring materials including green linoleum, stone tile, bamboo, cork, recycled carpet, 
reclaimed wood; 
-Eco-friendly insulation options include panels made from sustainable and non-toxic sources, 
loose fillings from newspaper and fibers treated with fire retardant, batted cavity insulation of 
treated fibers; 
- Windows providing high energy efficiency ratings fitting decor of the building with placement 
through the structure to enhance natural lighting and heating/cooling functions; and wall 
coverings such as made using natural or recycled fiber paper for backing and non-toxic inks/dyes 
for print patterns or paints/finishes not using toxic VOCs or other materials such as pigments as 
coloring agents. 
 
5.1.2.3 Most eco-friendly roofing options:  
The most eco-friendly roofing option is installing solar roof shingles (as shown in figure )  which 
are composed of photovoltaic cells that transform the energy of the sun into electricity to power 
the home. For plant lovers, installing a green roof takes on a literal connotation. Green roofs are a 
roofing option that involves covering the roof of the house with plants as shown in figure . 
 
  
Fig.3 Eco-friendly roof with solar shingles Fig.4 Eco friendly Green Roof in tower building 
 
5.1.2.4 Green Wall:  
Green wall as shown in figure is an important consideration to ensure green environment in the 
green building.  
 
  
Fig.5 Green wall Fig.6 Green wall attached to green roof 
 
 
41 
 
5.1.2.5 Kitchen with Green Environment: 
 Kitchen should be constructed in such a way that it can help to minimize green house gases in 
the green building as shown in figure  
 
  
Fig.7 Gorgeous eco-friendly  kitchen Fig.8 Ordinary eco-friendly kitchen 
 
5.1.2.6 Eco-friendly Bed Room:  
To protect the good health, everybody should take rest in eco-friendly bed rooms (as shown in 
figure ) essentially accommodated in all kind of green buildings. 
 
  
Fig.9 Eco-friendly master bedroom Fig.10 Eco-friendly ordinary bed room 
 
5.1.2.7 Eco-friendly drawing room: 
 For leading a healthy life, eco-friendly drawing room (as shown in figure ) should be taken into 
consideration in the construction of a building.   
 
  
Fig.11 Eco-friendly gorgeous drawing room 
 
Fig.12 Ordinary eco-friendly drawing room 
 
42 
 
5.1.2.8 Eco-friendly meeting and seminar room:  
Eco-friendly meeting room (as shown in figure 13) should be accommodated in offices and 
commercial establishments to conduct the meetings in eco-friendly environment. To arrange 
workshops, seminars, symposiums, technical sessions etc. eco-friendly seminar room should be 
provided in institutions and international hotels (as shown in figure  14) .  
 
  
Fig.13 Eco-friendly meeting room 
 
Fig.14 Eco-friendly Conference/seminar room 
 
 
6.  Conclusion 
 
In modern construction, a thoughtful integration of green engineering especially green building 
technology will help to preserve the external environment and will provide greater benefits to 
humans through the maximum use of eco-friendly, environmentally safe and energy efficient 
building and construction materials, use of natural resources, human safety, wellbeing and health 
and wellness consideration . In the long run, a green environment will be established through the 
ideal and planned use of environmental commodities, restricted utilization of natural resources, 
energy, sunlight, transport systems, travel mode etc. in the way of green living on the earth 
leading to the better eco-friendly solution reducing global warming significantly. 
 
References 
 
Bazzaz, F. A., Fajer, E. D. (1992); Plant life in a CO2-rich world. Scient. Am. 1992: 1821  
Houghton, J. T., Jenkins, G. J., and Ephrauma, J. J. (1990); Climate Change, The IPCC Scientific 
Assessment, Cambridge UniversityPress, Cambridege, UK, 365 pp.  
FFC (2001); Sustainable Federal Facilities: A Guide to Integrating Value Engineering, Life-Cycle 
Costing, and Sustainable Development by Federal Facilities Council (FFC). Washington, DC: National 
Academy Press. 
Graves, H. M., and Phillipson, M. C., 2000: Potential implications of climate change in the built 
environment, BRE Centre for Environmental Engineering/ BRE East Kilbride, FBE Report 2, 
December 2000, Construction Research Communications Ltd, UK 
IPCC (2001);  Climate Change 2001, The Third Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) 
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change) 2007. Fourth Assessment Report. Last 
accessed: 1/10/2007, from: http://www.ipcc.ch 
IPCC, 1996. Watson, R.T., Zinyowera, M.C., Moss, R.H. (Eds.) Climate Change 1995: Impacts, 
Adaptations and Mitigation of Climate Change: Scienti"c-Technical Analyses. Contribution of 
43 
 
Working Group II to the Second Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.  
IPCC, 1998. Watson, R.T., Zinyowera, M.C., Moss, R.H. (Eds.) The regional impacts of climate 
change: an assessment of vulnerability. A Special Report of IPCC Working Group II, Cambridge 
Univer-sity Press, Cambridge. 
Jodha N.S., 1989, Potential strategies for adapting to green house warming: Perspective from the 
developing world, in: Green House warming: Abatement and Adaptation, Rosenberg N.L., 
Earterling III W.E., Crosson P.R., and Darmstadter J. (eds), RFF Proceedings, Climate Resources 
Division, pp.147-158  
Kimball, B. A., J. R. Mauney, F. S. Nakayama and S. B. Idso: 1983, Effects of Increasing 
Atmospheric CO2 on Vegetation. Vegetatio 104/105:65-70. 
ORP (2004); Sustainable Development and Society (PDF 20.8 MB) by U.S. General Services 
Administration, Office of Government-wide Policy, Office of Real Property (ORP). Oct 
2004.Stanley, E.H., and H.M. Valett (1991), Interactions between drying and the hyporheic zone 
of a desert stream, pp. 211–233 in P. Firth and S.G. Fisher (eds.), Global Climate Change and 
Freshwater Ecosystems, Springer-Verlag, New York. 
44 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
TECHNO-ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF GREEN ELECTRICITY GENERATION FROM 
RICE HUSK 
 
 
A. K. M. Sadrul Islam 1 and Md. Ahiduzzaman 2  
 
 
ABSTRACT: Bangladesh produces more than 46 million tonne of paddy each year. About 70% 
of this paddy is processed in local rice mills to produce food grain rice. Husk is produced as 
waste biomass during  rice processing. Annual rice husk production is about 9.0 million tonnes 
in Bangladesh. A major portion of this husk is used for producing steam in rice mill for parboiling 
and drying processes of rice. After burning of husk for parboiling, the excess amount husk could 
be used as a biomass resource for electricity generation. The availability of rice husk in a rice 
processing zone is dependent on the amount of the paddy processed and the husk burning 
technology used for parboiling process. The husk also can be used as a source of biomass energy 
for producing electricity.  Before going to install such a power plant detail study is needed for a 
sustainable supply of husk as feed stock. In this study 200 number of rice mills were surveyed 
from four major rice processing zones viz. Pulhat (Dinajpur), Naogaon, Bogra, and Ishawrdi 
(Pabna) clusters to explore available husk and to estimate the potential of electricity generation 
from rice husk. Total paddy processed in these clusters is 3.62 million tonne. Amount of surplus 
husk for selected rice processing zones is estimated to be 455356 tonne per year. The potential 
power capacity is estimated to be 41 MW based on the estimated available rice husk considering 
the steam turbine technology used for electricity generation. Furthermore, potential of electricity 
generation from rice husk is analyzed based on three different scenario in national context. 
Potential electricity generated is estimated to be 1180 GWh (Reference), 1462 GWh (Scenario-1) 
and 1615 GWh (Scenario-2) in 2010 and these values will be increased to 1875 GWh (Reference), 
4621 GWh (Scenario-1) and 5366 GWh (Scenario-2) in 2030 for steam turbine technology use. 
 
1.  Introduction 
Bangladesh has reportedly over one hundred thousand Rice Mills - large, medium and small. 
They process paddy, using mostly the parboiling practice. The rice mills use the thermal energy 
of steam generated in boilers, which are fired by rice husk - a byproduct of paddy processing in 
the rice mills and which is globally well-known as very convenient source of dry biomass energy 
of reasonable heat value. In global context, annual rice husk production is 137 million tonnes 
whereas, in Bangladesh, about 9.0 million tonnes of rice husk is produced (FAOSTAT 2011). In 
Bangladesh context, out of 37.08 million tonnes of total biomass produced from agro-residues, 
                                                        
1Department of Mechanical and Chemical Engineering, Islamic University of Technology (IUT), Gazipur-
1704, Bangladesh, sadrul@iut-dhaka.edu 
2Senior Scientific Officer, Farm Machinery and Postharvest Technology, Bangladesh Rice Research Institut
e, Gazipur-1701, Bangladesh, ahid72@yahoo.com 
45 
 
rice husk contributes about 26% by mass (BBS 2009).  At present about 67-70% of rice husk is 
consumed for steam producing in rice mills (Ahiduzzaman 2007 and Ahiduzzaman et al. 2009). 
With a few exceptions, presently most of the ‘boilers’, used in these rice mills of Bangladesh are 
very inefficient. This results in a huge wastage of rice husk, which is an important source of 
biomass. Preliminary estimates are indicative that at least 50% of the rice husk produced could be 
saved and made surplus for its better use as input for small power generation (Baqui et al. 2008). 
As a matter of basic dissemination strategy, applicable to most of the developing countries, 
initially the entrepreneurs/investors feel shy to invest in a relatively new technology, as they lack 
the confidence on the technical functioning and financial/economic viability of ventures in such 
an area. Before launching a husk based power generation technology, it is important to know the 
production and distribution of available rice husk resource at different location. There are some 
different options to enhance the availability of rice husk such as increasing the un-parboiled 
process, improvement of thermal and combustion efficiency of existing husk fired boiler for 
parboiled process of paddy. Another important issue is the sustainable supply of rice husk in 
future for husk based power generation plant. Therefore, rice husk production and supply system 
is analyzed for electricity generation from husk in Bangladesh.  
 
2. Methodology 
Rice husk production and consumption process in rice mills are shown in Fig. 1. There are main 
two sector of rice process viz. household level process and processed in rice mill. Husk obtained 
from household level process cannot be collected due to its wide spread localization. Therefore, 
husk from household level process is not considered as supply source of husk for electricity 
generation. Paddy processed in rice mill is considered the source of husk supply. There are 
several rice processing zones in the country. To conduct the investigation four major rice 
processing zones were selected to estimate potential husk available for electricity generation. The 
selected rice mill clusters are located at Dinajpur, Naogaon, Bogra, and Ishawrdi (Pabna). A 
survey questionnaire was used to collect the information on monthly quantity of paddy processed, 
amount of husk produced, amount of husk consumed for rice processing purposes and the surplus 
amount of rice husk. The details of this study is given in Ahiduzzaman (2011). 
 
Another study is conducted to estimate the total electricity generation from rice husk in 
Bangladesh. LEAP (Long-range Energy Alternative Planning System) tool is used to make three 
different scenarios for consumption of energy. The basic parameter for estimating scenarios data 
are shown in Table 1. 
 
Table 1. Basic parameter of rice processing at different scenario 
 
Activity level Reference scenario Scenario-1 Scenario-2 
Paddy processed in mill 70% 90% 90% 
Parboiled processed paddy 90% 90% 50% 
Unparboiled processed paddy 10% 10% 50% 
Traditional parboiling 100% 5 5 
Improved parboiling 0 95% 95% 
 
46 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Rice husk biomass production and consumption 
Figure 1. Rice husk biomass production and consumption 
3. Results and Discussion 
 
3.1. Available husk at rice mills  
 
Annual paddy processing capacity and surplus amount of husk from the four selected rice 
processing zones are presented in Table 2. The annual paddy processing capacities were 
estimated to be 936923, 394976, 1366980 and 925048 tonne per year for Pulhat (Dinajpur), 
Bogra, Naogaon and Ishawrdi cluster, respectively. Total paddy processed in these clusters was 
3.62 million tonne. Amount of surplus husk for selected rice processing zones were estimated to 
be 82904, 586925, 192551 and 121209 tonne per year for Pulhat, Bogra, Naogaon and Ishawrdi 
cluster, respectively. Total surplus of husk were 455356 tonne per year in the selected four 
clusters.  
 
3.2. Electricity generation capacity based on rice husk energy at the study areas 
 
Electricity generation from rice husk depends on the availability of raw material and the 
technology for conversion of rice husk to energy. For a gasification based power plant, the 
Total paddy production in Bangladesh (100%) 
Paddy processed in mill (70%) Processed in household (25%) Seed (5%) 
Un-parboiled process (10%) Parboiled process (90%) 
St
ea
m
 
 
Parboiling Drying 
Milling Traditional 
milling 
Modern milling 
 Husk  
H
ot
 a
ir 
 
Drying 
Milling 
Husk  
H
ot
 a
ir 
 
Surplus Husk Potential for Electricity Generation 
47 
 
Table 2. Monthly average quantity of paddy processed and husk surplus at different rice 
processing clusters 
Cluster of rice 
mill 
Paddy processed, 
tonne/yr 
Paddy processed, 
tonne/yr/mill 
Husk surplus, 
tonne/yr 
Husk surplus, 
tonne/yr/mill 
Dinajpur  936923 2647 82904 234 
Bogra 394976 1490 58692 221 
Naogaon 1366980 1763 192551 248 
Ishawrdi 925048 2415 121209 316 
Total 3,623,927 455,356 
 
efficiency of electrical energy generation from husk is 16% while for a steam turbine power plant, 
the efficiency of electrical energy generation from husk is 25% (Bergqvist et al. 2008). Singh 
(2007) mentioned that for a steam turbine technology, 1.3 kg of husk is required to produce one 
kWh electricity. Based on the assumption the capacity of electricity power generation is 
estimated for the study areas (Table 3 and Table 4). The potential electricity generation are 
estimated to be 51.58 million kWh, 119.81 million kWh, 75.41 million kWh and 36.52 million 
kWh for Dinajpur, Naogaon, Ishawrdi and Bogra cluster, respectively considering gasification 
technology (Table 3), whereas the corresponding electricity generation are estimated to be 80.60 
million kWh, 187.20 million kWh, 117.84 million kWh and 57.06 million kWh for Dinajpur, 
Naogaon, Ishawrdi and Bogra cluster, respectively (Table 4). 
 
3.3. Economic analysis of electricity generation from rice husk 
 
Economic analysis is done both for gasification technology and steam turbine technology. Plant 
capacities are determined by considering the yearly operating hours of 7300 and 8000 hours per 
year for gasification based plant and steam turbine plant, respectively. Operation and 
maintenance costs are considered as five percent of capital cost of plants. The investment costs 
are considered to be 1300 US$/kW and 1850 US$/kW for gasification and steam turbine 
technology, respectively. Discount rate is considered to be 10%. Total running cost for of 
electricity is found to be in the range of 0.121 to 0.122 US$/kWh for gasification technology, 
while for electricity cost is found to be in the range of .084 to .085 US$/kWh. To estimate the 
lifetime cost, lifespan of power plants are considered to be 10 years and 20 years for gasification 
and steam turbine power plant, respectively. Finally the life time cost of electricity are found to 
be in the range of 0.149 to 0.152 US$/kWh for gasification technology and in the range of 0.111 
to 0.115 US$/kWh for steam turbine technology (Table 3 and Table 4).  
 
Since the electricity from rice husk is considered green, therefore CDM effect on electricity 
generation is estimated. Carbon dioxide emission from present project is considered to be nil 
while the carbon dioxide emission from existing grid electricity is considered to be 0.599 kg 
CO2/kWhe (Fridleifsson et al 2008, Hanova and Dowlatabadi 2007). The price of certified 
emission reduction is considered to be 15 US$/kWh. Hence the Net CDM effect is found to be 
(0.009) US$/kWh electricity generated both for gasification and steam turbine technology of 
power plant (Table 3 and Table 4). 
 
 
 
48 
 
3.4. Sensitivity analysis 
 
A financial analysis is done both for gasification and steam turbine technology of power plant. 
The present market price of electricity is considered to be 0.10 US$/kWh. Then the net present 
(NPV) value is found to be -13009859 US$ and -3634569 US$ for gasification and steam turbine 
technology, respectively and it reveals that the project is not financially viable. Hence a 
sensitivity analysis is done by varying the market price of electricity. The sensitivity analysis 
shows that the positive NPV is found at market price of 0.106 US$/kWh for steam turbine and 
0.142 US$/kWh for gasification technology (Figure 2) and the corresponding internal rate of 
return (IRR) is 11.45% for steam turbine and 11.87% for gasification technology, respectively 
(Figure 3). 
 
3.5. Projection of future rice production in Bangladesh 
 
The production of rice is projected using the growth of 2.35%. The growth is calculated from the 
average growth of rice production data from 1971 to 2009. The projected rice production is 
increased to 71 million tonne in 2030 (Figure 4).  
 
3.6. Rice processing in Bangladesh 
 
All produced paddy is not processed for preparation of food grain. About 5% of total paddy is 
used as seed for using next growing season. Among the rest of paddy about 70% is processed in 
local rice mill. The rest 25% of paddy is processed in rural household level (Fig 1). Rice husk is 
produced as by product in rice mill at the rate of 20% of mass fraction of paddy. The rice husk is 
primarily consumed for steam producing in parboiling process and drying process of paddy. The 
rest amount of husk could be an important source of husk based electricity generation plant. 
 
3.7. Husk produced in rice mill 
 
Amount of husk produced in rice mill depends on the amount paddy processed in mill. Husk 
produced in rice mill could be increased by increasing the amount of processed paddy in mill. 
Amount of paddy processed in mill is considered 90% of total paddy at the end of 2030 for 
scenario 1 and scenario-2. As a result the husk production is increased from 9.96 million tonne 
(reference scenario) to 13.16 million tonne (Figure 5). 
 
Table 3. Economic analysis for electricity generation from rice husk with gasification technology 
 
Rice mill cluster Inputs Unit 
Dinajpur 
(Pulhat) 
Naogaon Ishawrdi Bogra 
Available husk, 000' 
tonne/yr 
000' 
tonne/yr 
82.9 192.55 121.21 58.69 
Rice husk 
treatment/refinement 
 Gasification Gasification Gasification Gasification 
Furnace/gasification 
technology 
 Fluidized bed Fluidized bed Fluidized bed Fluidized bed 
49 
 
Energy conversion 
technology 
 IC Engine IC Engine IC Engine IC Engine 
Engine specification  4-stroke SI 
gas engine 
4-stroke SI gas 
engine 
4-stroke SI 
gas engine 
4-stroke SI gas 
engine 
Efficiency Percent 16% 16% 16% 16% 
Energy generation kWh/yr 51,582,222  119,808,889  75,419,556  36,518,222  
Operating hour hr/day 20.00  20 20 20 
Operation hour hr/yr 7,300.00  7300 7300 7300 
Plant gross capacity MW 7.00 17.00  10.00  5.00  
Investment cost US$/kW 1,300.00  1,300.00  1,300.00  1,300.00  
Price of husk US$/kg 0.06 0.06 0.06 0.06 
Fuel handling cost US$/kWh 0.016 0.016 0.016 0.016 
O&M cost US$/kWh 0.009  0.009  0.009  0.009  
Fuel cost US$/kWh 0.096  0.096  0.096  0.096  
Total running cost US$/kWh 0.121 0.122 0.121  0.121  
Economic life time Yr 10 10 10 10 
Interest % 10% 10% 10% 10% 
Investment cost US$/kWh 0.029  0.030  0.028  0.029  
Life time cost US$/kWh 0.150  0.152  0.149  0.150  
CO2 effect      
CO2 emission for grid 
electricity 
kg/kWh 0.599 0.599 0.599 0.599 
Total project emission 
of fossil CO2 
kg/kWh 0 0 0 0 
Total CO2 reduction tonne/yr 30,897.75  71,765.52  45,176.31  21,874.42  
CERs US$/tonne 15 15 15 15 
Revenue from CERs US$/yr 463,466.27  1,076,482.87  677,644.71  328,116.23  
Net CDM effect US$/kWh (0.009) (0.009) (0.009) (0.009) 
 
Table 4. Economic analysis for electricity generation from rice husk with steam turbine 
technology 
 
Rice mill cluster Inputs Unit 
Dinajpur 
(Pulhat) 
Naogaon Ishawrdi Bogra 
Available husk, 000' 
tonne/yr 
000' 
tonne/yr 
82.9 192.55 121.21 58.69 
Rice husk 
treatment/refinement 
 Grinding <3 
mm 
Grinding <3 
mm 
Grinding <3 
mm 
Grinding <3 
mm 
Furnace/gasification 
technology 
 Suspension 
burning 
Suspension 
burning 
Suspension 
burning 
Suspension 
burning 
Energy conversion 
technology 
 Rankine 
Cycle 
(steam) 
Rankine Cycle 
(steam) 
Rankine Cycle 
(steam) 
Rankine Cycle 
(steam) 
Engine/Turbine 
specification 
 Multistage 
condensing 
turbine 
Multistage 
condensing 
turbine 
Multistage 
condensing 
turbine 
Multistage 
condensing 
turbine 
Efficiency (fuel to net Percent 25% 25% 25% 25% 
50 
 
electricity) 
Energy generation kWh/yr 80,597,222  187,201,389  117,843,056  57,059,722  
Operation hour  hr/yr 8,000  8000 8000 8000 
Plant gross capacity MW 11.00 24.00  15.00  8.00  
Investment cost US$/kW 1,850.00  1,850.00  1,850.00  1,850.00  
Husk price US$/kg 0.06 0.06 0.06 0.06 
Fuel handling cost US$/kWh 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 
O&M cost US$/kWh 0.013  0.012  0.012  0.013  
Fuel cost US$/kWh 0.062  0.062  0.062  0.062  
Total running cost US$/kWh 0.085  0.084  0.084  0.085  
Economic life time Yr 20 20 20 20 
Interest % 10% 10% 10% 10% 
Investment cost US$/kWh 0.030  0.028  0.028  0.030  
Life time cost US$/kWh 0.114 0.112  0.111 0.115  
CO2 effect      
CO2 emission for grid 
electricity 
kg/kWh 0.599 0.599 0.599 0.599 
Total project emission 
of fossil CO2 
kg/kWh 0 0 0 0 
Total CO2 reduction tonne/yr 48,277.74  112,133.63  70,587.99  34,178.77  
CERs US$/tonne 15 15 15 15 
Total revenue from 
CERs 
US$/yr 724,166.04  1,682,004.48  1,058,819.85  512,681.60  
Net CDM effect US$/kWh  (0.009)  (0.009)  (0.009)  (0.009) 
 
 
Figure 2. Effect of market price of electricity on net present value 
 
51 
 
 
Figure 3. Effect of market price of electricity on internal rate of return 
 
 
Figure 4. Paddy production scenarion in Bangladesh 
 
52 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Husk production scenario in rice mill 
 
 
Figure 6. Husk consumption in rice mill at different scenario 
 
53 
 
 
Figure 7. Husk surplus from different scenarios 
 
3.8. Husk consumed in rice mill 
 
Husk is consumed primarily for steam producing in rice parboiling process. More amount of 
parboiled paddy consumes more rice husk. At present about 90% of paddy is processed through 
parboiling. About 120 kg of husk is consumed for each tonne of paddy parboiled. The husk 
consumption for parboiling could be reduced from 120 kg to 49 kg for each tonne of paddy 
parboiled by replacing the traditional boiler with improved boiler. At present all boilers used are 
traditional type. In scenario-1, it is assumed that 95% of traditional boiler is to be replaced by 
improved boiler to reduce the husk consumption for parboiled process. The other way to reduce 
the rice husk consumption is reduction of parboiled coverage as well as enhancement of 
unparboiled process. In scenario-2, coverage of parboiled process is reduced to 50% from 90% 
(reference scenario). The results of husk consumption for three different scenarios are shown in 
Figure 6. The husk consumption is reduction to 4.56 million tonne (Scenario-1) and 3.18 million 
tonne (Scenario-2) from 6.47 million tonne (reference). 
 
3.9. Husk surplus after consumed in rice mill 
 
The surplus amount of husk is calculated deducting the consumed amount of husk from total 
potential of husk (20% of paddy mass). The surplus amount of husk is increased to 8.60 million 
tonne (Scenario-1) and 9.98 million tonne (Scenario-2) from 3.49 million tonne (Reference) 
(Figure 7). The results show that there is huge potential to save rice husk by changing the 
technology for parboiling. 
54 
 
4.  Potential of Electricity Generation from Rice Husk 
 
Rice husk biomass easily can be used for electricity generation. Amount of electricity generated 
from rice husk depends on the type of technology used for energy conversion. There are several 
technologies for electricity generation from biomass. In the present study steam turbine and 
gasification technology are considered for estimating the potential of electricity generated from 
surplus amount of husk from different scenarios. Efficiency of these technologies is reported to 
be 16% and 25% of gasification and steam turbine respectively (Bergqvist et al. 2008). Based on 
this assumption the potential electricity generated from husk is presented in Figure 8 and Figure 9.  
 
Potential electricity generated is estimated to be 1366 GWh (Reference), 1692 GWh (Scenario-1) 
and 1870 GWh (Scenario-2) in 2010 and these values will be increased to 2170 GWh (Reference), 
5348 GWh (Scenario-1) and 6210 GWh (Scenario-2) in 2030 for gasification technology use 
(Figure 8).  
 
Potential electricity generated is estimated to be 2135 GWh (Reference), 2644 GWh (Scenario-1) 
and 2922 GWh (Scenario-2) in 2010 and these values will be increased to 3391 GWh (Reference), 
8356 GWh (Scenario-1) and 9704 GWh (Scenario-2) in 2030 for steam turbine technology use 
(Figure 9). Corresponding power capacities of husk based generation plant are shown in Figure 
10 and Figure 11. 
 
Electricity consumption for rice processing in Bangladesh is shown in Figure 12. Amount  of 
electricity consumed is estimated to be 812 GWh (Reference), 891 GWh (Scenario-1) and 900 
GWh (Scenario-2) in 2010 and these values will be increased to 1292 GWh (Reference), 2030 
GWh (Scenario-1) and 2070 GWh (Scenario-2) in 2030. The results show that the amount of 
electricity generated from rice husk is sufficient to meet the electricity needed for rice processing 
purposes. Moreover, surplus amount of electricity could be served to national grid. 
 
 
 
Figure 8. Potential of electricity generation from available husk at different scenarios for 
gasification based technology 
 
55 
 
 
 
Figure 9. Potential of electricity generation from available rice husk at different scenario for 
steam turbine technology 
 
 
 
Figure 10. Potential of power capacity from available rice husk at different scenarios for 
gasification based technology 
 
56 
 
 
Figure 11. Potential of power capacity from available rice husk at different scenario for steam 
turbine technology 
 
 
Figure 12.  Electricity consumption for rice milling at different scenario 
 
 
57 
 
4. Conclusion 
 
Power generation from rice husk is modern use of this waste material. The study results conclude 
that there is a potential to produce electricity from rice husk in selected rice processing zones of 
Bangladesh. It is estimated that 5 to 24 MW capacity generation plant can be installed in the 
different selected areas based on the available surplus husk after their own consumption. The 
economic and financial analysis shows that the project is not viable at the present market price of 
electricity. Hence income from CERs and premium on sales of electricity enhance the viability of 
the project. The positive NPV is found at market price of 0.106 US$/kWh for steam turbine and 
0.142 US$/kWh for gasification technology and the corresponding internal rate of return (IRR) 
11.45% for steam turbine and 11.87% for gasification technology, respectively. In national 
context maximum 9704 GWh electricity can be generated from rice husk with a power capacity 
of 1330 MW in 2030. 
 
 
References 
 
 
FAOSTAT (2011) http://faostat.fao.org/site/339/default. aspx accessed on 20.8.11 
BBS (2008). Statistical yearbook of Bangladesh. Dhaka: Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics, 
Ministry of Planning. 
M. Ahiduzzaman, “Studies and Investigation on Extraction of Energy and Value-Added Product 
from Rice Husk”, Ph.D. Thesis, Mechanical and Chemical Engineering Dept, Islamic 
University of Technology, Sept. 2011.  
M. Ahiduzzaman. “Rice Husk Energy Technologies in Bangladesh” Agricultural Engineering 
International: the CIGR Ejournal. Invited Overview No. 1. Vol. IX. January, 2007.   
Ahiduzzaman, M., Baqui, M. A., Tariq, A. S. and Dasgupta, N. (2009). Utilization of Rice Husk 
Energy for Rice Parboiling Process in Bangladesh. Intl. J. BioRes 6(2):47-79. 
Baqui, M. A.,  Ahiduzzaman, M.,  Khalequzzaman, M., Rahman, M. M., Ghani, J. and Islam, 
S.M.F. (2008): Development and Extension of Energy Efficient Rice parboiling Systems in 
Bangladesh. A Comprehensive Research Report submitted to German Technical 
Cooperation (GTZ). 
Bergqvist, M. M.; Wardh, K. S.; Das, A. and Ahlgren, E. O. (2008). A techno-economic 
assessment of rice husk-based power generation in the Mekong River Delta of Vietnam. Int. 
J. Energy Res. 2008; 32:1136–1150 
Singh, R. I. (2007). Combustion of Bio-Mass in an Atmospheric Fbc: An Experience & Study. 
Paper presented at the International Conference on Advances in Energy Research Indian 
Institute of Bombay, December 12-15, 2007. 
Fridleifsson IB, Bertani R, Huenges E, Lund JW, Ragnarsson A, Rybach L. The possible role and 
contribution of geothermal energy to the mitigation of climate change. In: Hohmeyer O, 
Trittin T, editors. IPCC scoping meeting on renewable energy sources, proceedings. 2008. 
p. 59–80. 
Hanova J, Dowlatabadi I. Strategic GHG reduction through the use of ground source heat pump 
technology. Environ Res Lett 2007; 2:8, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/2/4/044001. 
 
58 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh   
 
 
 
RECENT EARTHQUAKE RELATED ACTIVITIES IN BANGLADESH 
 
 
Mehedi Ahmed Ansary1 
 
 
ABSTRACT: In this paper a brief summary of the activities and researches undertaken in the 
field of earthquake engineering in Bangladesh for the last few years have been presented. Also 
description of completed and current BUET researches is briefly discussed. Currently, BUET, 
DU, Bangladesh Earthquake Society (BES), CDMP and some government and non-government 
organizations, and media are playing a major role in earthquake risk mitigation efforts. Still 
Bangladesh needs to go a long way to achieve a satisfactory level of earthquake disaster 
mitigation. Some general recommendations are also provided to meet this objective. 
 
1. Introduction 
 
In the recent past, Bangladesh has not suffered any damaging large earthquakes, but in the past 
few hundred years, several large catastrophic earthquakes struck this area. So far, all the major 
recent earthquakes have occurred away from major cities, and have affected relatively sparsely 
populated areas. This has limited the human casualty and the economic losses. However, the 
1993 Killari and 2001 Gujarat earthquakes in India has amply demonstrated that inappropriate 
construction technology may lead to high casualty levels even for moderate earthquakes (Sinha 
and Goyal, 1994).  
     In 1897, an earthquake of magnitude 8.7 (recently modified by Ambraseys (2000) to be 8.0) 
caused serious damages to buildings in the northeastern part of India (including Bangladesh) and 
1542 people were killed. Recently, Bilham et al. (2001) pointed out that there is high possibility 
that a huge earthquake will occur around the Himalayan region based on the difference between 
energy accumulation in this region and historical earthquake occurrence. The population increase 
around this region is at least 50 times than the population of 1897 and cities like Dhaka, 
Kathmandu, Guwahati have population exceeding several millions. It is a cause for great concern 
that the next great earthquake may occur in this region at any time. 
     A strong earthquake affecting major urban centres like Dhaka, Chittagong, Sylhet may result 
in damage and destruction of massive proportions and may have very severe long-term 
consequences for the entire country. After the 1971 independence, most major urban centres of 
Bangladesh have grown tremendously due to unabated migration from the smaller towns and 
rural areas. As a result, the cities have developed in haphazard fashion with little consideration 
for proper town-planning norms. There is, consequently, a need to be prepared against all 
                                                        
1 Department of Civil Engineering, BUET, Bangladesh 
Email: ansaryma@ce.buet.ac.bd; Fax: 8802-8620586; 8802-9665639 
 
59 
 
possible natural and man-made disasters that are likely to occur in Bangladesh. For this purpose, 
it is essential to have realistic understanding of the consequences of likely damage in major cities 
due to different disasters. This will permit rational planning of mitigation efforts in order to 
minimise effects of these disasters. 
     The extent of damage to structures and casualty level due to an earthquake in the future can be 
reduced by the introduction of suitable mitigation measures. These mitigation measures can be 
categorized as structural and/or non-structural. The structural measures are those that directly 
influence the performance of building stock through strengthening of code provisions and the 
prevalent construction practice. Incorporating the appropriate structural mitigation measures can 
reduce the vulnerability of any building type. The non-structural mitigation measures include 
improvement in the state of awareness and preparedness before a disaster, land-use control and 
other government policies, and the infrastructure related to response following a disaster. The 
non-structural measures help to reduce the severity of casualty levels following an earthquake. In 
order to reduce the consequences of a major earthquake in the cities of Bangladesh, it is 
necessary that appropriate structural as well as non-structural measures be undertaken.  
 
2. Activities for the Last Few Years 
 
In 2001, WSSI sponsored the author to participate in an interdisciplinary reconnaissance team 
from developed and developing countries around the world to visit the earthquake affected 
Gujarat state. It was an unique experience for the author to visit and to get “live” learning 
experience from an earthquake devastated region with the presence of experienced people of 
different interests and professional background. This exposure motivated the author to work in 
the field of earthquake risk reduction.  
     In 1996, the author together with a BUET team comprising Prof. J.R. Choudhury and Dr. T.M. 
Al-Hussaini submitted a project proposal to the Jamuna Multipurpose Bridge Authority to install 
seismic devices on the bridge (a 4.8 km long RCC deck girder bridge) and the surrounding area. 
The Panel of Expert at the 9th Milestone Meeting approved the project on March 1997. But it 
took another six years to get approval from GoB and install the instruments on the bridge.  The 
author also developed a course on Earthquake Engineering for postgraduate level at BUET and 
for the last seven years has been offering the course at the postgraduate level. In the following 
paragraphs a brief summary of activities undertaken by different organizations of Bangladesh to 
mitigate earthquake disaster are presented. 
 
2.1 Bangladesh University of Engineering & Technology (BUET) 
  
Department of Civil Engineering, BUET offers postgraduate courses on Earthquake Engineering, 
Soil Dynamics, Structural Dynamics and Vibration Analysis. Until 1996, their existed only two 
postgraduate theses linked with Earthquake Engineering. But after 1996, at least ten more 
postgraduate theses related to this field were completed. Currently two students are pursuing their 
PhD and four more students are pursuing for their Master’s thesis in the Department in 
Earthquake Engineering field. 
     Department of Civil Engineering, BUET is working as a consultant to the 4.8 km long Jamuna 
Multipurpose Bridge to monitor the seismic instruments that the Department’s faculty members 
under the leadership of the author helped to be installed in July 2003. In addition to the seismic 
instrumentation of the bridge, there is a borehole accelerograph at 57 m depth and seven free-
60 
 
field seismic instruments at Bogra, Natore, east and west end of the bridge, Mymensingh, 
Gazipur and Dhaka. Figures 1 and 2 show location of the bridge, free field and bridge 
instrumentation. 
     In April 2002, BUET put forward a proposal for the establishment of a National Center for 
Earthquake Engineering (NCEE) and included it in BUET’s next five-year plan for 
implementation. In March 2003, an MOU was signed between NCEE and ICUS, University of 
Tokyo. In January 2004, a linkage is established between Virginia Polytechnic Institute, USA and 
NCEE with USAID funding. The author is working as the NCEE project director of this linkage 
program.  
     Under the leadership of the author, several BUET team performed field surveys after the 
recent Bangladeshi earthquakes (Ansary et al., 2001, Ansary et al., 2003). The author also visited 
earthquake-affected parts of Gujarat state of India as mentioned earlier with GERIT (Mistry et al., 
2001) under the joint sponsorship of EMI-WSSI. The author has also contributed two reports one 
on unreinforced masonry and the other on mud houses to the EERI’s World Housing 
Encyclopedia Project. 
     Recently, BUET acquired 60 analog SMA-I Type accelerographs from SAFER cities project 
of COSMOS-WSSI initiative. These accelerographs will be installed at different government 
installations of Bangladesh all over the country to acquire earthquake data. These data will be 
used to develop attenuation laws for Bangladesh, which can be readily used for earthquake 
hazard analysis and updating the existing seismic zonation map. Figure 3 shows a typical SMA-I 
type accelerograph. 
     Questionnaire survey among architects, design and site engineers, planners, insurance 
agencies, banks and loan disbursing agencies were undertaken in February 2004. The survey was 
completed in June and a report was published. Another report on building survey using Rapid 
Visual Screening (RVS) technique was completed in Dhaka city’s Shahjahanpur area in May 
2005 and a report was published in July 2005. 
     A workshop on earthquake curricula development was held at BUET on July 22, 2004. 
Altogether 34 faculties of different universities of Bangladesh attended and gave their feedback. 
A report was also published in August 2004. 
     Under NCEE-VPI linkage project several BUET faculties were already trained in various 
earthquakes related topics in India for one to two weeks.  
     Directorate of Continuing Education, BUET in October 2004, conducted the first short course 
on Earthquake Resistant Design and Retrofitting of Buildings. Later on April and September 
2005 similar short courses for Professional Engineers of Bangladesh were offered. The author 
worked as the course coordinator of these short courses. 
     In July 2005, Ministry of Science, Information and Communication Technology of GoB 
provided a fund to the author for a one-year project titled as Earthquake Vulnerability Assessment 
and Community Awareness. Under this project, community awareness regarding the effect of 
earthquake and vulnerability analysis of a ward of old Dhaka was conducted. 
     In December 2005, BUET-VPI University Linkage project put forward some 
recommendations for its phase-II work to USAID-Bangladesh. Table 1 presents the sub-
programme of this proposed project. 
 
 
 
 
61 
 
2.2 Government Agencies 
  
Disaster Management Bureau (DMB) was established with the help of UNDP and UNICEF in 
1993. Although initially it was established to manage flood and cyclone, after the 1997 
earthquakes in Chittagong and Sylhet region, Bureau started to train different government 
officials and volunteers about pre and post-earthquake preparedness and management techniques. 
For the last couple of years, Bureau conducted fifty or more earthquake training workshops in 
different regions of Bangladesh. In 2002, it also published a Disaster Management Training 
Manual. The second part of the manual has a complete chapter on Earthquake Training Module 
and Public Awareness Guidelines.  
     The Ministry of Disaster Management & Relief (MDMR) is currently working as the 
government coordinator for all activities regarding earthquake. Recently, they asked all the 
concerned ministries, departments and armed forces division to submit Contingency Plan 
regarding earthquake. The Ministry also compiled a list of available rescue and recovery 
equipment available in the country. MDMR held a mock drill in April 12, 2005. The second 
phase (2003-2008) of Program for Enhancement of Emergency Response (PEER), a USAID 
funded international project includes Bangladesh with the existing four other PEER affiliated 
countries – India, Indonesia, Nepal and Philippines. The program aims to strengthen and 
institutionalize capacities in emergency and disaster response of the member countries. An MOU 
in this regard has been signed between PEER and Ministry of Food & Disaster Management 
(MoFDM) in June 2004. 
     In 2001 Bangladesh Meteorological Department (BMD) initiated a project to establish four 
broadband seismic stations at Rangpur, Sylhet, Dhaka and Chittagong cities. The author is a 
member of the technical committee providing support to purchase and install the seismic stations. 
Public Works Department (PWD) is responsible for constructing all the government buildings of 
the country. For the last two years, the Department arranged several in-house workshops to train 
their engineers about earthquake resistant design. Also the engineers of this organization have 
started to use seismic codes in designing buildings. 
     Bangladesh Armed Forces Division (AFD) played a significant role in all past disaster 
management in the light of the tasks assigned in the “Standing Order on Disaster, 1999” 
circulated by MoFDM. Recently, Bangladesh Armed Forces, in consonance with the national 
initiative, chalked out a contingency plan for Dhaka city (Rasul, 2003). According to the AFD’s 
contingency plan, the city is divided into eight sectors with predefined tasks after an earthquake. 
AFD will also activate “Disaster Management and Relief Monitoring Cell” at Prime Minister’s 
Office after an earthquake. 
     Geological Survey of Bangladesh (GSB) is the oldest organization in the country involved 
with the development of seismic zonation maps. The organization was instrumental in developing 
the 1972 and 1979 seismic zonation maps (Choudhury, 1993). But unlike its predecessor the 
Geological Survey of India (GSI) under the British rule, it did not initiate any research in 
earthquake field. Currently it depends on USGS and GSI for earthquake source information. In 
September 2004, GSB together with USGS and UNESCO conducted a four-day long workshop 
on seismic analysis for the South Asia region in Dhaka. 
     Upon request from MFDM, GoB, European Commission sent an Identification Mission for 
the Disaster Preparedness Programme in Bangladesh. The mission worked in Bangladesh from 
January to February 2004 and submitted a comprehensive report to GoB. Also a one-day long 
62 
 
workshop on Earthquake Disaster Preparedness was conducted on February 18, 2004. The 
recommendations are presented in Table 2. 
     In April 2004, a JICA mission visited Bangladesh upon a request from MFDM, GoB. At the 
end of their stay in Bangladesh, a seminar on improving seismology service in Bangladesh was 
conducted on April 17, 2004 and findings were reported. 
     In September 2004, a WB-ADB joint mission visited Bangladesh to assess the disaster 
preparedness status in Bangladesh. Although their specific agenda is to assess the 2004 damaging 
flood and its affect on the economy of Bangladesh, but the team also met technical personnel in 
the field of earthquake engineering in Bangladesh. 
     In August 2005, Education Engineering Department with the help of DMB held a one-day 
long workshop on Earthquake Management and Building Code for their engineers. 
 
2.3 Bangladesh Earthquake Society 
  
Bangladesh Earthquake Society (BES), a non-government voluntary organization was established 
on April 2002 and was registered on January 2003. The first election of the society was held on 
August 2003 and a 12 member executive committee (EC) was elected. The EC members consist 
of engineers, geologists, NGO activists and government administrators. The author was elected as 
the Secretary-General of the Society for 2003-2005 and 2005-2007 terms. 
     After the July 2003 Rangamati Earthquake, the author and other members of the Society 
visited the affected earthquake sites and provided the government with their technical advice. 
BES also organized two national level workshops and held four monthly seminars so far. The 
first workshop was jointly organized with RAJUK [Capital Development Authority] on August 
21, 2003 to train the engineers of Bangladesh about the earthquake resistant design. The second 
workshop was organized together with Disaster Management Bureau (DMB), Ministry of 
Disaster Management and Relief on September 4, 2003 to sum up the findings of 2003 
Rangamati Earthquake. Both the workshops put forward a set of recommendations to be 
implemented either by the government or by the NGOs with the help of donor agencies. The 
second workshop was the first of its kind where architects, armed forces personnel, engineers, 
geologists, NGO activists and government officials presented their papers. 
     In March 2003, an MOU was signed between BES and ICUS, University of Tokyo. BES 
organized the First Bangladesh Earthquake Symposium (BES-1) on December 14-15, 2005. 
BUET and BES jointly hosted the symposium where 40 papers were presented. 
 
2.4 Non-government Organization 
  
CARE-Bangladesh is involved in the disaster related field of Bangladesh for the last thirty years. 
But only after the 2001 Gujarat Earthquake, it focused its attention in earthquake disaster. Some 
recent activities of CARE are: Circulation of pamphlets among the general masses on 
communities’ role before, during and after an earthquake; development of seismic risk scenarios 
for different cities of Bangladesh; planning to circulate IAEE’s manual for the seismic design of 
non-engineered construction in Bengali; arranging different earthquake sensitization seminars 
and workshops in different parts of Bangladesh. The author collaborated CARE in those projects. 
Bangladesh Red Crescent Society (BDRCS) also arranged a seminar to discuss their role before, 
during and after an earthquake in line with MDMR’s policy in September 2003. Also it has 
63 
 
started a five-year project on Earthquake Preparedness and Response Program (EPRP) from July 
2005. 
     Similarly some NGOs and societies such as ActionAID, CARITAS, EPRC, FBAST, GJKS, 
JUUAB, SAFE and SDF organized seminars and workshops on earthquake risk mitigation in 
different cities of Bangladesh. 
     In 2004, ActionAID Bangladesh started a new two-year project in Chittagong zone under a 
European Union fund. The primary objective of the project is to train schoolteachers and hospital 
doctors of Chittagong to cope with emergency situations caused by an earthquake. 
     Recently, Bangladesh Academy of Sciences (BAS) formed a Committee on Disaster. Prof. JR 
Choudhury is the convener and the author is one of the members of the committee. In 2005, BAS 
participated in three working session meetings to reduce Tsunami risk in Asia on the invitation of 
Chinese Academy of Sciences. Two of these meetings were held in Beijing, China and the other 
one in Phuket, Thailand. 
 
2.5 Other Organizations 
  
Bangladesh Insurance Academy (BIA) conducted the first workshop on catastrophic risk 
management in 1998. The second workshop on similar topic was just held on November 2003. 
The author acted as a resource person in both the workshops. 
     Recently BRAC University together with ADPC, Bangkok organized a two weeklong 
workshop on Earthquake Vulnerability Reduction in Cities (EVRC3). The author worked as a 
resource person at that workshop. 
     Conscience for Existence, a student organization of BUET under the direct patronization of 
the author worked at the community level of one of the wards of Dhaka city (Ratan et al., 2003). 
Recently, the group organized an exhibition to share their experience of the survey carried out in 
the community level of the old Dhaka.  
     Department of Civil Engineering, Chittagong University of Engineering & Technology 
(CUET) established an Earthquake Research Centre in 2001. It started a joint research together 
with the University of Macedonia, Skopje. Under the agreement faculty members of CUET are 
regularly trained in Skopje. 
     Geohazards Research Group (GRG) of the Department of Geology of Dhaka University in 
cooperation with Lamont-Doherty Earth Laboratory of the University of Columbia, USA 
installed a broadband seismometer in Dhaka (Khan, 2003) and several GPS devices at some 
places of Bangladesh recently. The Department also got funding from Ministry of Science & 
Technology (MOST) to carry out research in the field of earthquake hazard assessment for 2003-
2004. Recently Dhaka University administration has started to assess the vulnerability of their 
existing buildings and halls to prioritize their retrofitting measures. 
     Institute of Engineers Bangladesh (IEB) organized several seminars on earthquakes. Currently 
it is offering some courses on earthquake resistant design together with Engineering Staff College, 
Bangladesh. 
     Institute of Diploma Engineers Bangladesh (IDEB) also offered several courses on earthquake 
vulnerability and seismic design of structures. The author also acted as one of the resource 
persons at those workshops. 
     Real Estate and Housing Association of Bangladesh (REHAB) also conducted one seminar 
after the 2001 Bhuj Earthquake. 
64 
 
     Department of Civil and Environmnental Engineering, Shahjalal University of Science & 
Technology (SUST) and the author is currently working to develop seismic microzonation map 
of Sylhet. Also building data survey for particular wards of Sylhet was carried out.  
     In 2002 UNDP submitted a Comprehensive Disaster Management Program (CDMP) proposal 
to the forum of donor agencies. It got donor communities approval in early 2003. The sub-
program 4 (a)-ii of the PCP contains an urban risk research component on urban earthquakes. The 
objective is to facilitate an expansion of mitigating programs through initiating studies to obtain 
in-depth knowledge about the earthquake threat and related risks in the urban areas 
recommending mitigation measures for selected cities of Bangladesh. In August 2006, CDMP 
launched the sub-program 4(a) with the financial aid of EC. But the objectives were reduced due 
to budgetary constraint. 
     In May 2005, BRAC University with the sponsorship of OXFAM organized a workshop on 
Building Code and Pre- and Post-Earthquake Disaster Management. 
     Institute of Architects Bangladesh (IAB) organized the first Seminar on Disaster on December 
2005 at Sheraton Hotel with the financial assistance of OXFAM-GB. 
     Some buildings were also retrofitted by private and government organizations. But no 
systematic process to retrofit vulnerable structures was undertaken by any government 
organization.  
 
2.6 Mass media 
 
Mass media such as newspapers and television networks played a vital role during the recent 
2003 Rangamati Earthquake. They covered and broadcasted as much information as they could 
collect from the affected areas of Barkal, a remote hilly town. The journalists followed the 
different expert team who visited the earthquake-hit areas and published their findings in the 
National Dailies and showed live footage in the Television News. Currently newspapers have 
taken initiative to regularly publish news of earthquakes and interviews of local earthquake 
experts and their research activities, which will certainly enhance public awareness level.  
     In 2004-2006, Press Institute of Bangladesh (PIB) has conducted several workshops for 
journalists. All these workshops have a lecture component titled “Earthquake - the new threat”. 
 
3. Summary of Buet Research 
 
In the following two articles a brief summary of completed and current research works at the 
Department of Civil Engineering, BUET are presented.  
 
3.1 Completed researches 
 
3.1.1 Development of design spectra 
In this study effort was made to develop response spectra from simulated earthquakes using 
different soil parameters (Noor, 1997; Ansary et al., 2000) as Bangladesh lacks of strong ground 
motion data. Figure 4 presents the developed design spectra for different soil types. 
 
3.1.2 Seismic hazard assessment 
Recently Sharfuddin (2001) developed a new earthquake catalogue for Bangladesh and the 
surrounding region. Based on this catalogue and using existing attenuation law, seismic hazard 
65 
 
were assessed. Finally an updated seismic zonation map of Bangladesh was proposed as shown in 
Figure 5. This zoning map is based on consistent peak ground acceleration levels with a return 
period of 200 years.  
 
3.1.3 Soil-structure interaction 
Iqbal (1999) studied soil-structure interaction effects of tall buildings with mat foundation.  
Ahmad (1998) studied seismic response analysis of isolated and non-isolated bridges.  
Hoque (2002) investigated a soil-structure interaction problem of a simple deck-girder bridge. He 
studied behavior of an abutment as well as of the total system of a bridge under dynamic loading. 
 
 
3.1.4 Magnitude-intensity relationships  
Sabri (2001) investigated magnitude-intensity and intensity-attenuation relationships for 
earthquakes in Bangladesh using macroseismic data. A selected sample of isoseismal maps from 
18 events were revised and used for this study. The regression analysis for the whole data set, 
which consists of 74 (Ii, Di) pairs corresponding to 18 events, gives the following mean 
attenuation expression: 
 
 
where Ms is the recalculated surface wave magnitude, R is the hypocentral distance that 
corresponds to the mean epicentral radius Di = (Ri2- ho2)1/2 of isoseismal Ii in km, and  ho is mean 
focal depth and P has different values for different probabilities. 
 
3.1.5 Earthquake risk analysis  
Rahman (2004) studied the seismic damage scenario for Dhaka city. The study covered damage 
survey of 90 wards of Dhaka city based on site amplification and liquefaction. Similar studies for 
Chittagong, Mymensingh and Sylhet cities are onging. 
 
3.1.6 Structures subjected to lateral loads  
From 2001 to until to date, several BUET researchers [Enam, 2001; Haque, 2002; Islam, 2003; 
Mostofa, 2004] studied sway characteristics of RC frames, effect of randomly distributed infill 
walls on the vibration characteristics of RC frames, effective slab strip width of flat plate 
structure, behavior of shear-wall frame under lateral loads etc. 
 
3.2 Current researches 
 
3.2.1 Community based activities  
The author with the help of final year undergraduate and graduate students of the Department of 
Civil Engineering of BUET and SUST undertook field survey in different cities of Bangladesh. 
The survey data collected different existing building and infrastructure information of different 
wards of the cities (Ansary, 2004). Additionally students also communicated with the local ward 
commissioners and inhabitants to find out their earthquake related knowledge and preparedness 
level. Figure 6 presents some field-level activities of the students in Ward 64, Dhaka City. 
 
 
 10.93P  4.9(logR) - R)0.0007483( - )s1.283(M  8.378  I
66 
 
3.2.2 Seismic microzonation 
A crucial step towards preparedness for future seismic events and mitigation of seismic risk 
involves a microzonation study of a city. Also local site conditions and local site effects are the 
most important factors when an earthquake strikes a human settlement. Keeping this in mind, 
seismic microzonation maps for Dhaka (Rahman, 2004) and other major cities of Bangladesh are 
being prepared. For this purpose microtremor observation as well as one-dimensional numerical 
simulation (SHAKE) has been performed to complement the experimental results. Figure 7 
presents microzonation map of Dhaka. The site amplification map has three zones with the 
following characteristics: zone 1 with resonant frequency of less than 3 Hz and mean ground 
motion amplification of 2.5; zone 2 corresponds to resonance frequencies in a band of 3 to 5 Hz 
having a ground motion amplification of 1.8; zone 3 corresponds to resonance frequency greater 
than 5 Hz and mean ground motion amplification of 1.8 Hz. The liquefaction map has two zones: 
a zone with liquefaction possibility and the other with no liquefaction possibility. Similar maps 
for Chittagong, Mymensingh, Rangpur and Sylhet are under preparation.  
 
3.2.3 Seismic risk 
As mentioned earlier that a building inventory was carried out and based on the collected 
information, seismic risk for scenario earthquakes were estimated for Dhaka (Rahman, 2004). 
Figure 8 presents wardwise average building damage. Currently building inventory survey of 
Chittagong, Mymensingh, Rangpur and Sylhet cities are being conducted. 
 
3.2.4 Vulnerability assessment of existing structures  
Vulnerability assessment of existing structures using NDT technique is important. So far all the 
damage scenarios developed for Bangladesh were based on fragility curves proposed by Arya 
(2000). The researcher of BUET has recently got some fund from University Grants Commission 
(UGC) and CASR, BUET to carry out research in this direction. 
Recently, with the help of Prof. Maksud Helali of Mechanical Engineering Department of BUET, 
the author together with Dr. Noor has developed an indigenous Shake Table (10 ft x 18 ft). Figure 
9 shows the equipment.  
 
3.2.5 School earthquake safety Programmes  
BUET conducted the following earthquake safety related programmes in several schools in old 
part of Dhaka city: 
 First Aid Trainings 
 Search and Rescue Trainings 
 Mock Drills 
Figures 10 present some First Aid training session and mock drill at the Armenitola High School. 
 
4.  Disaster Mitigation in Bangladesh 
 
Bangladesh achieved remarkable success in managing frequently occurring hazards such as 
cyclones and floods. The country has a well-organized Cyclone Preparedness Plan (CPP), which 
boasts a volunteer list of around 44000. Even country like India and Sri-Lanka try to emulate 
CPP. To cope with the earthquake disaster a similar Earthquake Preparedness Plan (EPP) need to 
be implemented.  
 
67 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Location of accelerographs in Bangladesh 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2: Jamuna Bridge together with some installed accelerographs and field ETNA 
0 100
kilometers
200
Proposed BMD
Others
JMBA-BUET
68 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3: Typical SMA-I type accelerograph 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4: Proposed design response spectra 
0 1 2 3
0
1
2
3
4
5
Damping = 0.05
 Soil Type I
 Soil Type II
 Soil Type III
 Soil Type IV
   
  S
PE
CT
RA
L 
A
CC
EL
ER
A
TI
O
N
   
  
PE
A
K
 G
RO
U
N
D
 A
CC
EL
ER
A
TI
O
N
TIME PERIOD, T (SECONDS)
69 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5: Updated seismic zonation map of Bangladesh 
 
 
 
 
 
Seismic Zones
Zone 3 = 0.25g
Zone 2 = 0.15g
Zone 1 = 0.075g
70 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6: Panchayat level community based meeting at Ward 64, Dhaka 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7: Seismic microzonation maps for Dhaka 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
71 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8: Wardwise average damage for Dhaka 
 
     For earthquake disaster mitigation professional as well as government solution is required. 
Architects, engineers, geologists, planners etc. will provide technical aspects and NGOs, mass 
media and social scientists will provide social aspects of professional solution. Builders, financial 
institutions, land developer would be required to support professional solution. Government 
agencies can help to implement professional solution through policymaking and policy 
enforcement. Government solution should clearly point out regulatory jurisdiction of each 
organization.  
 
72 
 
 
Figure 9: Indigenous Shake Table at BUET 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10: First Aid Training at Armenitola High School by BUET trainers 
 
 
 
 
 
73 
 
 
Table 1: Identified projects of BUET-VirginiaTech [Ansary et al., 2005] 
 
No Sub-programme Deliverables 
1 Develop appropriate training curriculum and conduct training for 
on-site technical personnel involved in construction-related 
activities such as building inspectors with diploma certificate, bar-
binders, and masons. This training plan will also include the 
building inspectors of regulatory bodies like Rajdhani Unnayan 
Katripakhha (RAJUK), Chittagong Development Authority (CDA), 
and municipal corporations. It is anticipated that approximately 
1,000 personnel of different categories will be trained initially free 
of charge with the expectation of developing an environment for 
increased demand of trained personnel, and subsequently training 
with charge for tuition-funded continuation 
Training curricula for 
principal categories 
of building process 
professionals and 
labor and initial 
training of 1000 
participants 
 
2 Develop Program for Seismic Design and Construction Quality 
Improvement (technical outreach). Conduct a pilot on building 
construction compliance regulations for seismic safety. This will be 
a demonstration activity of a public or private building construction 
site that will identify the elements for compliance with regulations 
and best practices for seismic safety. This will be recorded for use 
in audio-visual trainings. 
Analysis of current 
design and 
construction practice 
and comprehensive 
strategy for design 
review, site 
inspection, education 
and enforcement 
3 Input to Comprehensive National Program Plan for Seismic Risk 
Reduction for Bangladesh (public policy). Develop and implement 
public awareness programs, such as the Earthquake Preparedness 
Program (EPP), for at least two cities. This program will make 
local people aware of the potential danger of an earthquake and 
how to conduct search and rescue operation in their locality. 
Trainers developed for the PEER program may be used for search 
and rescue (note: over 80% of disaster victims are generally 
rescued by the local communities before external assistance 
arrives).  
- Draft framework for 
national natural 
hazard risk reduction 
program 
- Prototype plan for 
targeted public 
awareness for 
earthquake hazard 
reduction 
4 Develop Seismic Vulnerability Screening Methods for Bangladesh 
(applied research). 
Seismic screening 
procedures 
methodologies for 
principal structural 
types and critical 
infrastructure 
5 Develop Seismic Loss Estimation Methodology for Bangladesh 
(applied research) with reference to the FEMA HAZUS 
methodology. 
Seismic loss 
estimation 
methodology tailored 
to available inputs 
and required outputs 
for Bangladesh 
74 
 
Table 2: Identified projects of Bangladesh Earthquake Risk Management 
Programme (BERMP) [Reynolds et al., 2004] 
 
No Sub-programme Executive Agency (Sub) Implementing Agencies 
1 Earthquake hazard mapping and 
assessment 
GSB BUET; Geol. Dept, DU; regional 
universities; 
2 Earthquake vulnerability 
assessment 
BUET; RAJUK; 
city corporations; 
PWD;  
Lifeline companies; 
3 Improving the Building Permit 
process 
PWD City corporations; BUET; IEB; IAB; 
IDEB; BACE; BES; etc. 
4 Improving policy and legal 
environment 
MDMR & DMB; 
PWD 
GSB; IAB; IEB; BACE; City corps; 
BUET, etc. 
5 Institutionalisation and 
institutional strengthening 
MDMR & DMB GSB; IAB; IEB; BACE; city corps; 
BUET;Tech & Eng. Univs; etc 
6 Develop earthquake Emergency 
Response System and integrate 
into existing ER framework 
MDMR & DMB AFD, Fire Service Dept; NGOs; BES; 
lifeline organisations;  
7 Develop and implement 
Earthquake Vulnerability 
Reduction demonstration 
projects 
PWD; BUET;  City corporations; BES; NGOs; 
LGED; 
8 Community-based Disaster 
Preparedness education 
BES; 
Municipalities; 
city corps; LGED; 
NGOs;  
NGOs; INGOs; 
 
Acknowledgment 
 
The author would like to acknowledge MoST, GoB grant in 1998-1999 and 2005-2006, USAID-
Bangladesh fund in 2004-2006, and CARE-Bangladesh fund in 2001-2002 through which 
building inventory data of Dhaka and other cities were collected.  
 
References 
 
Ahmad, S.I., 1998. Seismic response analysis of isolated and non-isolated bridges, M.Sc. 
Engineering Thesis, Department of Civil Engg., BUET, Dhaka. 
Ambraseys N.N., 2000. Reappraisal of North-Indian Earthquakes at the Turn of the 20th Century, 
Current Science, 79 (9-10): 1237-1250. 
Ansary, M.A., Noor, M.A. and Seraj, S.M., 2000. Response spectra based on simulated 
earthquakes: its application and assessment. Journal of Civil Engineering, 28 (1), 1-20. 
Ansary, M.A., T.M. Al-Hussaini, M. Sharfuddin and J.R. Choudhury, 2001. 1999 Moheskhali 
Earthquake: A Damage Study, Journal of Asiatic Society of Bangladesh, 27 (2), 139-149.  
Ansary, M.A., 2003. Site amplification study of Dhaka city by using microtremor observation, 
CASR Research Project Report, Department of Civil Engg., BUET, Dhaka. 
75 
 
Ansary, M. A., A. Sadek and T.M. Al-Hussaini, 2003. 2003 Rangmati earthquake and 
engineering assessment. Proceedings of the seminar on 2003 Rangamati Earthquake, 
September, Dhaka. 
Ansary, M.A., 2004. Seismic loss estimation of Dhaka for an earthquake of intensity VII, 
Oriental Geographer, 48 (1), 1-16. 
Ansary, MA, Krimgold, F., and Rahman, S., 2005. Proposed BUET-VPI Partnership for Seismic 
Vulnerability Reduction in Bangladesh – Phase II (2006-2008). 
Arya, A., 2000. Non-Engineered Construction in Developing countries - An Approach toward 
earthquake Risk Prediction, Proc. of 12th World Conference on Earthquake Engineering, 
New Zealand No. 2824 (published in CDROM). 
Bilham, R., V.K. Gaur and P. Molnar, 2001. Himalayan Seismic Hazard, SCIENCE, 293.  
BNBC, 1993. Bangladesh National Building Code, HBRI-BSTI. 
Cardona, C., R. Davidson and C. Villacis, 1999. Understanding Urban Seismic risk Around the 
World, Summary Report on the Comparative Study of the United Nations International 
Decade for Natural Disaster Reduction, RADIUS Initiative. 
Choudhury, J. R., 1993. In Meguro, K and Katayama, T. (editors), Seismicity in Bangladesh, 
Proceedings of the WSSI Workshop, February, Bangkok. 
DMB 2002. Disaster management training manual, published by Disaster Management Bureau, 
MDMR. 
Enam, M.B., 2001. Investigation of sway characteristics of reinforced concrete frames subjected 
to lateral loads, M.Sc. Engineering Thesis, Department of Civil Engg., BUET, Dhaka. 
Haque, M.E., 2002. Effect of randomly distributed infills on the vibration characteristics of RC 
frames, M.Sc. Engineering Thesis, Department of Civil Engg., BUET, Dhaka. 
Hoque, M.M., 2002. Analysis of bridge-soil interaction under dynamic loading, M.Sc. 
Engineering Thesis, Department of Civil Engg., BUET, Dhaka. 
Iqbal, M.A., 1999. Soil-structure interaction effects on tall buildings with mat foundation, M.Sc. 
Engineering Thesis, Department of Civil Engg., BUET, Dhaka. 
Islam, A.K.M.R., 2003. Investigation on effective slab strip width of flat plate structure subjected 
to lateral loads, M.Engineering Thesis, Department of Civil Engg., BUET, Dhaka. 
Katayama, T., 2003. Ten years with the world seismic safety initiative, Regional Development 
Dialogue, 24 (1), 107-114. 
Khan, A.A., 2003. Earthquake scenario of Bangladesh in reference to Kolabunia earthquake of 
July 27, 2003-vulnerable assessment of megacities, Proceedings of the seminar on 2003 
Rangamati Earthquake, September, Dhaka. 
Mistry, R, Dong, W. and Shah, H., 2001. Interdisciplinary observations on the January 2001 Bhuj, 
Gujarat earthquake, WSSI-EMI publication. 
Mostafa, M.G., 2004. Behavior of shear-wall frame structure under lateral loads, M.Engineering 
Thesis, Department of Civil Engg., BUET, Dhaka. 
Noor, M.A., 1997. Reappraisal of code provisions for structures subjected to seismic loading, 
M.Sc. Engineering Thesis, Department of Civil Engg., BUET, Dhaka. 
Rahman, G. F., 2004. Seismic damage scenario for Dhaka city, M.Sc. Engineering Thesis, 
Department of Civil Engg., BUET, Dhaka. 
Rashid 1999. Seismic microzonation of Dhaka city based on site amplification and liquefaction, 
M.Engineering Thesis, Department of Civil Engg., BUET, Dhaka. 
Rasul, I. I., 2003. Contingency plan of Bangladesh armed forces for earthquake disaster 
management in Dhaka city, Proceedings of the seminar on 2003 Rangamati Earthquake, 
September, Dhaka. 
76 
 
Ratan, M. A. A., Kashem, M. S. B., Hoque, M. M. and Ansary, M. M., 2003. Participatory 
community based disaster management: experinces from old Dhaka. Proceedings of the 
seminar on 2003 Rangamati Earthquake, September, Dhaka. 
Reynolds, J., Dixit, A., and Ansary, MA 2004. Identification Mission for the Disaster 
Preparedness Programme for Bangladesh. 
Sabri, S. A., 2001. Earthquake-intensity attenuation relationship for Bangladesh and surrounding 
region, M. Engg. Thesis, BUET, Dhaka.  
Shah, H., 2003. The last mile: earthquake risk mitigation assistance in developing countries, 
ICUS Proceedings, December, 2003. 
Sharfuddin, M., 2001. Earthquake Hazard Analysis for Bangladesh, M.Sc. Engg. Thesis, BUET, 
Dhaka.  
Sinha, R. and Goyal, A., 1994. Damage to buildings in Latur earthquake, Current Science 67, 
380-385.  
 
 
77 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh   
 
 
 
ROAD SAFETY: AN OVERVIEW OF KEY FACTS AND THE WAY FORWARD 
 
 
Dr. Md. Mazharul Hoque1 
 
 
1.  Introduction 
 
Road traffic accidents and injuries have now emerged as a serious man-made epidemic 
worldwide. The statistics on Bangladesh road accidents are indeed frightening. This is borne by 
the fact that as many as 55 people are reportedly killed in road traffic crashes each day (iRAP, 
2011) and by the end of today, it will sadly be the same. Like many other low-income countries, 
Vulnerable Road Users (including pedestrians, motorcyclists, bicyclists and unsafe and informal 
public transport users) account for large proportion of road deaths. It is also frightening to note 
that we are losing an amount of scarce resources which for example exceeds the amount of our 
development assistance received in the order of over 1.5 billion US dollars annually.  
 
We therefore must respond aggressively to this man-made epidemic and indeed have special 
obligation to all of us to take road safety forward on a whole scale through correct understanding 
of the concept and devising the appropriate and effective measures. The purpose of this short 
paper is to provide an overview of key road safety facts and the way forward with particular 
emphasis on our road safety challenges and opportunities. For further details reference should be 
made to Hoque et al. (2009), (2010), (2011) and iRAP (2011).  
 
2.  Key Road Safety Facts 
 
2.1  The Global Road Safety Problem: 
 
Annually, 1.3 million are killed and at least 50 million are injured globally and more than 85 
percent of these casualties (and 96% percent of child deaths) occur in low-and middle-income 
countries. More than half of the world’s traffic fatalities occur in the Asian-Pacific region 
although only one in five motorized vehicles are registered here. It is estimated that by 2020 
about two-thirds of the world’s traffic fatalities might be in the Asian-Pacific region. The burden 
of road accidents is comparable with malaria and tuberculosis and cost 1-3 percent of the 
country's GDP.  
 
Whereas road accident deaths are expected to fall in high-income countries as a result of 
implementation of many versatile and intensified road safety programs, they are however 
predicted to increase by more than 80 percent in the rest of the world over the next 20 years. It is 
                                                
1 Professor, Department of Civil Engineering and Founding Director, Accident Research Institute (ARI), 
BUET,Dhaka-1000,  Bangladesh, E-mail:mazharul@ce.buet.ac.bd 
78 
 
Figure 1  Typical crash, roadway hazards and road environmental 
deficiencies for safety 
imperative that sustained and accelerated efforts encompassing good practice and policies must 
be put in place on a firmer basis in order to combat the epidemic of deaths and injuries on the 
roads in low- and middle- income countries.  
 
2.2  The Road Safety Problem - Bangladesh Perspectives 
  
The road safety situation in Bangladesh is indeed also very serious by international standards 
with one of the highest fatality rates. It is estimated nearly 20,000 are being killed each year on 
our roads while around 4,000 are officially reported. It is the poor that are most vulnerable. 
Pedestrians, children, bi-cyclists, motorcyclists and those using informal transport including the 
bus and truck passengers are many times more harmed on the roads and are accounted for more 
than 80 percent of the total fatalities. Road accidents are now the leading cause of deaths for 
children aged between 10 to 14 years. About 70% road accident fatalities occurred in rural areas 
including rural sections of rural highways.  
 
The principal contributing factors to accidents are adverse roadway and roadside environment, 
poor detailed design of junctions and road sections, excessive speeding, overloading, dangerous 
overtaking, reckless driving, carelessness of road users, failure to obey mandatory traffic 
regulations, variety of vehicle characteristics and defects in vehicles and conflicting use of roads.  
The road environmental factors are particularly prevalent. Typical road crash, road safety hazards 
are shown in the Figures 1. 
 
Serious and immediate steps and initiatives are urgently needed at the national and local levels. 
Our road safety effort needs strengthening by activating lead agencies across a broad range of 
sectors with renewed governmental/ organizational/ political commitments, resources and 
pragmatic and effective actions and polices with the active role, co-ordination and guidance of 
the Ministry of Communications. 
 
3.  Major Road Safety Issues and Priorities  
 
3.1  Examples of Major Issues are: 
 
 Pedestrian-vehicle conflicts are the greatest problem with significant involvement of 
trucks and buses. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
79 
 
 Children are highly vulnerable in the traffic situation compared with many other 
countries of the world. 
 Accidents on national highways are more severe, accounting for nearly 40%, are 
clustering on fewer sections, known as Hazardous Road Locations (HRLs). 
 Predominant accident types contributing to high incidences of casualties are hit-
pedestrians, head-on and loss of control accidents. 
 Defective and road unworthy motor vehicles: presence of defective and road unworthy 
motor vehicles on road poses a threat to safety. 
 Over-involvement of trucks and buses in fatal accidents and conspicuity of vehicles 
 Drivers incompetency:  incompetent drivers and driving with open and wide spread use 
of fake licenses appear to be a major concern to safety on our roads. 
 Road engineering and environmental deficiencies: significant and serious road safety 
engineering and design deficiencies are most prevalent in many locations. 
 Inadequacy in police enforcement/ inspection and safety education: it is important to 
intensify the law enforcement and educational programs to alleviate the problems of road 
accidents. 
 Institutional weakness: road safety improvement efforts in Bangladesh seriously suffer 
from several serious drawbacks - lack of strong professional executive powers, 
fragmentation of responsibilities between agencies and insufficient inter-agency 
coordination, low level of staffing and lack of professional capacity.  
 Under-reporting accidents: this limits proper accident analysis to be carried out towards 
improving and monitoring road safety 
 We must get organized for working together to save many healthy and active lives and 
make roads safer. 
 
3.2  Examples of road safety priorities are: 
 
 Making road safety a policy priority agenda at the highest level ; 
 Set appropriate road safety targets, national strategy and plan of actions with the creation 
of a separate Road Safety Department/Authority 
 Designating a single central agency for road safety;  
 Activating lead agencies with assigning roles, responsibilities and specific actions; 
 Establishment of a reliable data set and seeking solutions through correct procedures,  
 Standards, safety conscious planning and design and good practices. 
 Reducing and control excessive and inappropriate speeding 
 Promote pedestrian safety as a priority issue with emphasis on safety of children on roads 
 Treatment of hazardous road locations as such treatments are highly cost-effective 
 Systematic implementation of low-cost engineering improvements to the safety of roads 
 Introduction of road safety audit process into the road planning, design and construction 
processes 
 Addressing the issue of over involvement of buses, minibuses and trucks in road traffic 
accidents and casualties 
 Set and enforce strong and uniform vehicle safety standards, roadworthiness and safer 
vehicle fronts 
 Enforce safety laws strictly and impose appropriate penalties and sanctions 
80 
 
 Enforce legislation requiring the use of motor cycle helmets, seat-belts, speed limits and 
control of impaired and aggressive driving 
 Ensure prompt and appropriate emergency care and rehabilitation of all injured people 
 Contemplate sustained programs for road safety capacity building for professionals and 
institutions / organizations 
 Set budget and make funding for road safety and support road safety research. 
 Revamp police accident data collecting procedures (including hospital and insurance 
sources) for getting necessary information for scientific analysis 
 
4.  The Way Forward 
 
4.1  Fundamental Principles  
 
Road traffic accidents result from failures in the interaction of humans, vehicles and the road 
environment- the elements that produce the road traffic system. The combination of these various 
elements to produce road accidents means that road safety itself has to be tackled in a multi-
functional manner in order to break the chains of events that lead to accidents and the eventual 
injuries of road users. An integrated, multi-disciplinary approach is required to reduce road 
accidents and consequent injuries and economic losses.  
 
Clearly, road deaths and injuries are the result of a complex interaction between the way people 
behave on the roads, the types of vehicles in use and the speed they are travelling, and the design 
of the roads themselves. Despite this complexity, the process of creating a road system that is 
genuinely safe is now well understood. Experience in implementing the well-established 'safe 
system' approach, which recognises the mutual importance of safe road users, safe vehicles and 
safe roads, shows how death and serious injury can be prevented on a large scale The following 
principles broadly underline the safe system approach. 
 
 mistakes, errors of judgment and poor driving decisions are intrinsic to humans. The 
road safety system needs to be designed and operated to account for this  
 humans are fragile, physically vulnerable, and have limited tolerance for surviving 
crashes. 
 unprotected, we cannot survive impacts that occur at even moderate speeds 
 safety can be built into the road system in a comprehensive and systematic fashion, 
not just having the apparent problem areas patched up 
 the 'engineered' elements of the system - vehicles and roads - can be designed to be 
compatible with the human element, perhaps taking lessons from motor racing that 
while crashes will occur, the total system is designed to minimise harm. 
 
Importantly, the road component remains a major consideration in the overall road safety 
management strategies. Indeed, the road component is a most important determinant of traffic 
accident frequency.  
 
4.2  A Framework 
 
It is time for accelerated actions and investments for improving safety on our roads. Serious and 
immediate steps and initiatives are urgently needed at the national and local levels. Our road 
81 
 
safety effort needs strengthening by activating lead agencies across a broad range of sectors with 
renewed governmental/organizational/political commitments, resources and pragmatic and 
effective actions and polices. 
 
Coinciding with the global event, the UN Decade of Action for Road Safety (2011-2020) in 
Bangladesh was launched on May 11, 2011. The global road safety Decade has been set with a 
goal to stabilize/halt the rising trends of road deaths particularly in low and middle income 
countries and then reduce the forecast level of global deaths by 2020. The UN Secretary General 
Ban Ki Moon has urged “real action on every highway and every street in every community” to 
save millions of lives during the Decade of Action for Road Safety. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2: A framework of actions to halt and reverse the increasing trend in road traffic fatalities 
around the world. 
 
It is now overwhelmingly important for countries like Bangladesh through joining these global 
initiatives we need to strengthen our efforts to ensure our national Decade of Actions in place to 
address one of the most serious public health issues and to save thousands of lives on roads. A 
framework for the Decade consisting of five pillars of actions has been outlined (depicted in 
Figure 2) and more can be seen in Global Plan for the Decade of action for Road Safety 2011-
2020. All of us can play a part to help implement our national and local activities in order to 
prevent and reduce the carnage on our roads and save many valuable lives and properties and 
thereby achieve safer roads in Bangladesh. Projection of global road depths with doing nothing 
and the decade of action is also depicted in Figure 3.  
 
 
82 
 
Figure 03: Green line shows possible road fatality savings by 2020 if a Decade of Action for     
Road Safety results in sustained governmental action for road injury prevention ( Source: Make 
Roads Safe Campaign 2011-2020) 
 
5.  Concluding Remarks 
 
Tackling road safety issue posits significant engineering, technological and societal and health 
challenges.  Achieving safety on our roads depends greatly on the commitment and efforts of the 
government, communities, organizations, families and individuals throughout the world as well 
as in Bangladesh. 
 
The way forward to greater road safety on roads indeed demands greater co-operation among all 
concerned by stimulating sustainable, structured and accelerated efforts in dealing with the 
problems.  Importantly, the remedy lies in urgent action to the development of systematic road 
safety practices through implementation of widespread countermeasures using scientific 
principles and programs. For Bangladesh it is imperative that such good practices and policies 
must be put in place on a firmer and sustainable basis in order to combat the epidemic of deaths 
and injuries on the roads.  
 
It is now abundantly clear and should be noted that engineering, road safety engineering in 
particular, can and should play a leading role in road safety. The underlying contention is that 
safety engineering practice, particularly low cost engineering improvements, can indeed 
contribute the lion's share to the reduction of accidents and casualties on the roadway system. The 
role of local road engineering professionals in this regard is vital for which intense training, 
awareness and research programs should be contemplated with due urgency.  
 
 
83 
 
Acknowledgement 
  
The paper has been prepared based on research carried out at BUET and the views expressed in 
the paper are those of the author.  
 
References 
Hoque, M.M., and Mahmud, S.M.S. (2009), “Road Safety Engineering Challenges in 
Bangladesh", 13th Road Engineering Conference of Asia and Australasia (REAAA), Korea. 
 
Hoque, M.M., Smith G., Hossain D.Z. and Mahmud d, S.M.S. (2010), “Improving Highway 
Safety in Bangladesh: Road Improvement and the Potential Application of iRAP”, 24th ARRB 
Conference, Melbourne, Australia 2010 
 
Hoque, M.M., Rahman A.K.M. F. and Mahmud, S.M.S. (2011), “A Note on Addressing the 
Challenges of Road Safety”, 10th BUET Convocation Souvenir-2011, BUET, Dhaka   
 
iRAP (2011), “ iRAP Bangladesh Pilot Project”, International Road Assessment Program (iRAP)  
 
www.who.int/roadsafety/deacade_of_action/ 
84 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
CAPTURE AND STORAGE-A SUSTAINABLE TECHNOLOGY TO CUT CARBON 
EMISSION: A LITERATURE REVIEW 
 
 
Tarique Ahmad1 and Md. Sadique Nawab2 
 
 
ABSTRACT: Climate change has become an important environmental and energy policy issue 
of our age. Human activities like burning of fossil fuel, certain industrial processes and various 
land use practices have contributed greatly to the accumulation of CO2 in the atmosphere. Carbon 
capture and storage (CCS) technologies are expected to play a key role in strategies to combat 
climate change. They allow for the continued utilization of fossil fuel energy sources while 
significantly reducing carbon emissions.CCS is especially important for coal-based developing 
economies such as China and India. Using these technologies, CO2  resulting from the 
production, processing and burning of oil, gas and coal from power plants and other industries  
would be captured, compressed, transported and stored into deep aquifers or deep oceans thus 
CCS would avoid atmospheric emissions altogether. Environmental impact, feasibility and 
economics of CCS technologies have been discussed in this paper and latest developments in this 
field have been focused.   
 
Keywords: climate change, carbon emission, power plants, carbon capture and storage, 
technologies. 
 
 
1.  Introduction 
 
There is a broad consensus that climate change is occurring, and that it is linked to a build up of 
greenhouse gases (GHGs) in the atmosphere, which trap heat and block outward radiation. 
Carbon dioxide (CO2) is the most significant of these GHGs and its main source is the 
combustion of fossil fuels. The analysis in Energy Technology Perspectives 2008 (ETP) projects 
that energy sector CO2 emissions will increase by 130% above 2005 levels by 2050 in the 
absence of new policies or from supply constraints resulting from increased fossil fuel usage 
(IEA, 2008a). Studies by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) indicate that 
the likelihood of significant environmental and social damage increases significantly if CO2 
concentrations in the atmosphere exceed about 550ppm.CCS is the only technology that will 
allow large-scale fossil fuel power generation and several vital industries to continue to be 
economically viable while reducing their CO2 emissions in a carbon-constrained world (IPCC, 
                                                        
1 PG student, Department of Civil Engineering, Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh, U.P, India. 
Tel. no.  +91980821186, tariqueahmadamu@gmail.com 
2 PG student, Department of Civil Engineering, I.I.T; Roorkee, Uttrakhand, India.    
sadiquenawabamu@gmail.com 
85 
 
2005). The ETP BLUE Map scenario, which assessed strategies for reducing GHG emissions by 
50% by 2050, concluded that CCS will need to contribute one-fifth of the necessary emissions 
reductions to achieve stabilization of GHG concentrations in the most cost-effective manner. The 
BLUE Map results revealed that if CCS technologies are not available, the overall cost to achieve 
a 50% reduction in CO2 emissions by 2050 will increase by 70% (IEA, 2008a). CCS would 
reduce the effective carbon intensity of energy by directly removing CO2 from flue gases and 
industrial processes and preventing its release to the atmosphere. 
 
 
2.  Prospects of Carbon Capture And Storage 
 
Some suggest that the carbon emission problem could be solved through the increased use of 
renewable energy source. But it will take very long time to become cost-competitive, thus 
making significant continued use of fossil fuels in the interim. Some suggest that the supply of 
fossil-fuel is limited and at a point of time the use of fossil fuel become too costly, forcing a 
switch to alternative energy sources. But this argument assumes that fossil fuels will become 
scarce before the gradual atmospheric buildup of GHGs becomes too costly in terms of its effect 
on terrestrial ecosystems and human societies. 
    Reserves are generally taken to be those quantities that geological and engineering information 
indicates with reasonable certainty can be recovered in the future from known reservoirs under 
existing economic and operating conditions. Resources are deposits that do not currently meet the 
 
Figure1. Carbon content of global oil, gas, and coal reserves compared with cumulative historic 
emissions from 1860 to 1998 
 
Note: The bars are not cumulative—that is, resources and additional occurrences are in addition 
to reserves. 
86 
 
criteria of proven reserves but may be converted to reserves given future advances in 
geosciences, technological improvements, and market conditions. Additional occurrences 
distinguish resources whose existence and technical and economic recoverability are most 
speculative. Data are from IPCC (Moomaw and Moreira 2001). 
 
Figure 1 demonstrates that, the carbon content of proven fossil fuel reserves exceeds cumulative 
historic carbon emissions from 1860 through 1998 by a factor of 5. Moreover, future years will 
likely bring the development of even more reserves, as undeveloped fossil fuel resources become 
technically and economically recoverable. Thus, it is believed that the current rates of extraction, 
could take hundreds of years before the current fossil fuel supply is exhausted. Rapidly 
developing countries like China and India show little interest in abandoning the use of their 
relatively inexpensive coal reserves, which constitute 20% of the global total (Energy 
Information Administration 2002). These two countries alone are projected to account for 22% of 
global annual emissions by 2020 (Energy Information Administration 2002). 
    Putting this in perspective, people often speak of doubling the preindustrial concentration of 
atmospheric carbon to 450 parts per million by volume (ppmv), which could result in global 
temperature increases of almost 2 degrees Celsius above 1990 levels by 2100 (Watson 
2001,p.101). 
    The huge stock of wealth invested in fossil fuels stands as a large political obstacle to any 
policy that would significantly curtail their continued use. These reasons all suggest that we will 
continue to consume fossil fuels for many years to come, releasing a large portion of carbon 
stores into the atmosphere in the form of CO2. Given our likely reliance on fossil fuels in the near 
and foreseeable future, policymakers are looking for alternative ways of reducing carbon 
emissions. Many view CCS technologies as a promising third alternative to increasing energy 
efficiency and switching to less carbon-intensive energy sources. CCS technologies could play an 
important role in mitigating carbon emissions, conditional on policies that impose a sufficiently 
stringent constraint on such emissions. Prospects appear to be most promising for carbon capture 
from electric power generation and some industrial sources, with storage in geologic formations 
such as depleted oil and gas reservoirs and deep aquifers. 
    Scientists thinks that CCS is a solution to climate change because Carbon intensive fossil fuels, 
especially coal, are the primary means of worldwide energy production, a scenario many 
forecasts do not expect to change appreciably over the near and intermediate term.  For example, 
the International Energy Agency (IEA) forecasts that fossil fuels will remain the dominant 
sources of primary energy world wide through 2030, with coal's share of the global power sector 
rising 3 percent to 44 percent.  Much of the increase in coal use is expected to come from 
developing countries, particularly China and India (OECD/IEA, 2001). 
 
3.  Technologies Involved In Carbon Capture And Storage  
 
CCS is defined as a system of technologies that integrates three stages: CO2capture, transport and 
geologic storage. Each stage of CCS is technically available and has been used commercially for 
many years (IEA, 2008b). However, various technologies with different degrees of maturity are 
currently competing to be the low-cost solution for each stage of the CCS value chain. 
3.1 CO2 capture 
 
Carbon capture technologies themselves are not new. Specialized chemical solvents were 
developed more than 60 years ago to remove CO2 from impure natural gas, and natural gas 
87 
 
operations continue to use these solvents today. In addition, several power plants and other 
industrial plants use the same or similar solvents to recover CO2 from their flue gases for 
application in the foods-processing and chemicals industries. Finally, a variety of alternative 
methods are used to separate CO2 from gas mixtures during the production of hydrogen for 
petroleum refining, ammonia production, and other industries (Herzog 1999). All of these capture 
technologies are considered relatively mature. Still, some believe that substantial technical 
improvements and cost reductions could be realized were these technologies applied on a large 
scale (Herzog, Drake, and Adams 1997). 
 
      There are three main approaches to CO2 capture, for industrial and power plant            
applications. 
o Post-combustion 
o Pre-combustion 
o Oxy-fuel combustion 
 
Each of these processes involves the separation of CO2 from a gas stream. There are five main 
technologies available for doing this, with the choice depending on the state (i.e. concentration, 
pressure, volume) of theCO2 to be captured: 
 Chemical solvent scrubbing 
 Physical solvent scrubbing 
 Adsorption/desorption 
 Membrane separation 
 Cryogenic separation. 
  
3.1.1 Post-combustion capture technology 
 
 
 
Figure 2 Post-combustion capture technology 
 
Post-combustion capture, which separates CO2 from gas mixtures, is a commercially available, 
mature technology used at hundreds of locations around the world. Typical projects involve the 
use of chemical amine-based solvents to selectively remove CO2, which upon heating, releases a 
high-purity CO2 off gas stream suitable for storage without any further treatment. Several smaller 
facilities using amine solvents to capture significant flows of CO2 from flue gas streams are in 
operation today; however, the technology has yet to be fully demonstrated at commercial-scale 
power plants. The evolution of alternative means of capturing CO2, such as membrane separation, 
chemical looping and solid adsorption processes, are at the R&D stage and may be able to 
88 
 
improve the overall efficiency of the process in the future. Further R&D is needed to identify 
solvents requiring less heating energy, lower solvent loss rates and corrosion risk, and alternative 
separation technologies.  
 
3.1.2 Pre-combustion capture technology 
 
 
 
Figure 3 Pre-combustion capture technology 
 
      Pre-combustion systems process the primary fuel in a reactor with steam and air or oxygen to 
produce a mixture consisting mainly of carbon monoxide and hydrogen (“synthesis gas”). 
Additional hydrogen, together with CO2, is produced by reacting the carbon monoxide with 
steam in a second reactor (a “shift reactor”). The resulting mixture of hydrogen and CO2 can then 
be separated into a CO2 gas stream, and a stream of hydrogen. If the CO2 is stored, the hydrogen 
is a carbon-free energy carrier that can be combusted to generate power and/or heat. Although the 
initial fuel conversion steps are more elaborate and costly than in post-combustion systems, the 
high concentrations of CO2 produced by the shift reactor (typically 15 to 60% by volume on a dry 
basis) and the high pressures often encountered in these applications are more favourable for CO2 
separation. Pre-combustion would be used at power plants that employ integrated gasification 
combined cycle (IGCC) technology (UNFCCC, 2001). 
   The advantage of pre-combustion separation over post-combustion is that it produces a smaller 
volume of gas for treatment, which is richer in CO2 and at high pressure. This reduces the size of 
the gas separation plant thus reducing capital costs. Also the higher concentration of CO2 enables 
less selective gas separation techniques to be used (eg physical solvents, adsorption/desorption) 
that require less energy to operate. In the longer term, hydrogen has significant future potential as 
an alternative fuel for transportation and for use in fuel cell plant. In fact in the USA one of the 
main motivators for developing IGCC technology, besides its use for power generation, is the 
production of hydrogen. Certainly hydrogen produced from fossil fuels, particularly from coal 
and natural gas, is the first stage for a ‘hydrogen economy’. 
 
 
 
89 
 
3.1.3 Oxyfuel capture technology 
 
 
 
Figure 4 Oxyfuel capture technology 
 
  Oxyfuel Combustion systems use oxygen instead of air for combustion of the primary fuel to 
produce a flue gas that is mainly water vapour and CO2. This results in a flue gas with high CO2 
concentrations (greater than 80% by volume). The water vapour is then removed by cooling and 
compressing the gas stream. Oxyfuel combustion requires the upstream separation of oxygen 
from air, with a purity of 95–99% oxygen assumed in most current designs. Further treatment of 
the flue gas may be needed to remove air pollutants and noncondensed gases (such as nitrogen) 
from the flue gas before the CO2 is sent to storage. As a method of CO2 capture in boilers, 
oxyfuel combustion systems are in the demonstration phase. Oxyfuel systems are also being 
studied in gas turbine systems, but conceptual designs for such applications are still in the 
research phase (UNFCCC, 2001). 
   The advantage of oxyfuel combustion is that it produces a highly CO2-enriched flue gas that in 
principle enables simple and low-cost CO2 purification methods to be used. Also, because 
combustion occurs in a low-nitrogen environment, the formation of nitrogen oxides is greatly 
reduced. However, it has the disadvantage of requiring an air separation plant, which is expensive 
and requires a considerable amount of energy to operate. At present there is less operational 
experience with this option, and there are operational questions to be addressed before it can be 
taken to full commercial deployment. 
 
 
3.2 CO2 Transport 
 
   Once CO2 is separated and captured as part of CCS, in most cases it must be transported to a 
storage area, usually a geologic reservoir. As part of this process, CO2 is compressed to a dense 
state ̶ about 150 times atmospheric pressure ̶ to make both transportation and storage more 
efficient.  This is called a supercritical fluid, where density resembles a liquid but with qualities 
that allow it to move and occupy the space like gas.     
   This supercritical CO2 can be transported by tanker (road, rail or water) or by pipeline, but with 
the large volumes involved in a CCS scheme (10-30MteCO2 per year), pipeline transport is the 
only practicable option. Tanker transport may have a role in smaller demonstration projects of the 
90 
 
order of 100-200kt CO2 per year. Most experience of pipeline transport of CO2 has been gained 
in the USA where the gas is used extensively for Enhanced Oil Recovery (EOR). For EOR in 
West Texas, CO2 is derived from naturally occurring geological sources in New Mexico and 
Colorado, and from amine scrubbing at four natural gas processing plants. Around 22MteCO2 is 
transported each year through a 3980km pipeline system to oilfields in the Permian Basin. 
 
 
                                                 Figure 5 Transport of CO2                               (Source: IPCC) 
The advantage of pipeline CO2 transportation is that it can deliver a constant and steady supply, 
without the need for intermediate storage along a distribution route.  Additionally, existing CO2 
pipelines have operated safely, and have not resulted in any environmental or health and safety 
issues for the public.  However , a greatly expanded  worldwide pipeline infrastructure costing 
billions of dollars will need to be built within a relatively short  time frame in response to 
modeled policies designed to stabilize atmospheric CO2 and avert possibly catastrophic  
climate change.(Congressional Research service: Emerging policy issues,19 April 2007,16) 
 
3.3 CO2 Storage 
 
CO2 can be stored in depleted gas and oil fields, in deep saline formations, or injected into 
declining oil fields to increase the amount of oil recovered. CO2 is injected under pressure into 
typically microscopic spaces in porous rocks – the gas is held within the rock and gradually binds 
chemically into the rock. The porous material in which the CO2 is contained is bounded by an 
impervious layer above. It is the same process that has kept oil and natural gas secure under the 
ground for millions of years. The storage sites are typically several kilometers under the earth’s 
surface. (IEA) 
 
3.3.1 Geological storage 
 
CO2 storage involves the injection of CO2 into a geologic formation to enhance carbon recovery. 
The three options for geological CO2 storage are saline formations, oil and gas reservoirs, and 
deep unminable coal seams (IEA, 2008b).Of the three, it is expected that saline formations will 
provide the opportunity to store the greatest quantities of CO2, followed by oil and gas reservoirs. 
In each case, geological storage of CO2 is accomplished by injecting it in dense form into a rock 
formation below the earth’s surface. Suitable storage formations can occur in both onshore and 
91 
 
offshore sedimentary basins. Coal beds also may be used for storage of CO2 where it is unlikely 
that the coal will later be mined and provided that permeability is sufficient. The option of storing 
CO2 in coal beds and enhancing methane production is still in the demonstration 
phase.(IPCC,2005) 
    Monitoring data from projects involving injection into depleted oil and gas fields and saline 
formations has shown that the CO2 performs as anticipated after injection with no observable 
leakage (IPCC, 2005). A number of other projects involving the injection of CO2 into oil 
reservoirs have also been conducted, primarily in the USA and Canada. Most of these projects 
use the CO2 for enhanced oil recovery (EOR), but some also intentionally store and monitor CO2 
concurrently with EOR operations. The practices in respect to CO2 injection are well-known; 
however, more experience is needed to improve predictions of CO2 behaviour at commercial 
scale. Exploration programmes are also needed to locate and characterise suitable storage sites, 
particularly deep saline formations. 
 
Global geological storage capacities have been estimated by the IEA Greenhouse Gas R&D     
Programme. These are: 
 
Table 1 Storage Capacities 
 
Storage option                                                            Capacity (Gt of CO2) 
depleted oil fields                                                                                      125Gt 
depleted gas fields                                                                                     800Gt 
deep saline aquifers                                                                           400 to 10,000Gt 
unmineable coal seams                                                                              148Gt
 
 
 
 
Figure 6 Methods for storing CO2 in deep underground geological formations (IPCC) 
 
92 
 
3.3.2   Ocean Storage: A potential CO2 storage option is to inject captured CO2 directly into the 
deep ocean (at depths greater than 1,000m), where most of it would be isolated from the 
atmosphere for centuries. This can be achieved by transporting CO2 via pipelines or ships to an 
ocean storage site, where it is injected into the water column of the ocean or at the sea floor. The 
dissolved and dispersed CO2 would subsequently become part of the global carbon cycle. 
 
                                                    
Figure 7 Methods of ocean storage (Source: IPCC) 
 
    The above figure shows some of the main methods that could be employed. Ocean storage has 
not yet been deployed or demonstrated at a pilot scale, and is still in the research phase. However, 
there have been small-scale field experiments and 25 years of theoretical, laboratory and 
modeling studies of intentional ocean storage of CO2.(IPCC, 2005) 
 
 
4. Cost And Economic Potential Of CCS     
 
4.1 Cost 
 
CO2 capture from combustion processes is rather expensive and energy-consuming, while CO2 
separation from natural gas wells is in general easier and cheaper. Today’s typical cost of CCS in 
power plants ranges from US$30 to 90/tCO2 or even more, depending on technology, CO2 purity 
and site. This cost includes capture $20-80/t; transport $1-10/t per 100 km; storage and 
monitoring $ 2-5/t. The impact on electricity cost is 2-3 US cents/kWh. Assuming reasonable 
technology advances, projected CCS cost by 2030 is around $25/tCO2, with impact on electricity 
cost of 1-2 US cents/kWh. CO2 separation cost from natural gas wells may be as low as $5-15/t 
CO2 (IEA, 2008). 
 
                                          
 
 
 
93 
 
Table 2 CCS Cost Summary 
 
CCS Component Cost Range 
Capture source: 
Power plants 
Gas processing  industry 
Other Industrial Sources 
 
15-75 US$/tonne CO2 net captured 
 5-55 US$/tonne CO2 net captured 
25-115 US$/tonne CO2 net captured 
Transport 1-8 US$/tonne  of  CO2 transported per 250 km 
Geological storage 0.5-8 US$/tonne CO2 injected 
                                                                                                                                                          (Source: IPCC) 
 
4.2 Economic potential 
 
The International Energy Agency estimates that without CCS, the costs of abating global CO2 
emissions will increase by over 70% each year. This is the equivalent of $1.28 trillion annually. 
We need to develop CCS at the earliest possible opportunity to realise cost reductions and 
efficiency savings – and in order to maximise the carbon abatement potential as well(CCSA). 
      CO2 capture from combustion processes is rather expensive and energy consuming while CO2 
separation from natural gas wells is in general easier and cheaper. CCS in power plants makes 
sense economically only for large, highly efficient plants. At present, the increased use of fossil 
fuels resulting from CCS could be as high as 35%-40%. It is expected to decline to 10%-30% in 
next-generation plants, and could be as low as 6% for more speculative designs. Efficiency 
losses, including CO2 compression at 100 bar, are estimated to be 8-12 percentage points for 
existing coal plants and to decline significantly in next generation plants (IEA). Post 2020 CCS 
will be cost-competitive with other sources of low-carbon power, including on-/offshore wind, 
solar power and nuclear. 
 
 
5. Environmental And Safety Issues 
 
As a relatively new and unknown technology that proposes placing CO2 into natural systems, 
CCS is exposed to public scrutiny and potentially prone to controversy. There are concerns that 
CO2 could be released during transport and injection or over time from geological storage. CO2 
release would need to be carefully monitored for human and environmental safety. There are 
already expertise and industrial protocols associated with its handling. Even using pessimistic 
assumptions it has been estimated that it is unlikely that more than 0.03% of the CO2 would be 
released during transport and injection. In many areas of the world CO2 is released from the 
ground naturally. However seepage out of geological CCS projects into environments not adapted 
to CO2 could lead to hazardous accumulations or have other detrimental effects. Dissolved in 
water CO2 forms a weak acid, familiar as carbonated water, which could affect sea water or water 
in aquifers (with potential impacts on drinking water). It has been estimated that such leakage 
94 
 
might release 0.004-2.4% of the CO2 stored on a 1000-year time scale. More understanding of 
long-term CO2 retention and the potential impacts on marine and land environments of seepage is 
needed, maybe involving experimental deliberate releases. A firm understanding of the 
environmental implications of CCS will need to be established before it can be fully deployed. 
This is important for supporting any changes to the Conventions controlling storage beneath the 
seabed, and for addressing concerns over inter-generational liabilities associated with long-term 
storage. Research is needed to determine the impact on ecosystems of any CO2 leakage as well as 
on how the CO2 behaves in storage. 
    Det Norske Veritas (DNV), a global independent foundation specializing in risk management 
services, recently concluded that CO2 geologic storage technology is by no means fail-proof or 
risk-free, but carefully selected and qualified storage sites that are operated according to effective 
regulatory supervision should be safe. It is a mature technology that has been used at industrial 
scale at several large sites both onshore and offshore. Geologic storage technology can be applied 
immediately, at a much larger scale, at tens to hundreds of sites globally.  
    DNV pointed to “almost 100 years of natural gas storage at hundreds of sites in North America 
and Europe, 35-plus years of experience with CO2 enhanced recovery in North America, 15-plus 
years experience with acid gas injection in Western Canada, 14-plus years experience at 
dedicated projects in the North Sea and Algeria, plus a number of research-focused pilot projects 
on five continents.” 
 
 
6. Public Awareness and Acceptance 
 
CCS is a new technology that is little known as a potential abatement option outside fossil fuel 
energy industries and research organisations. This low level of awareness suggests that early 
success or failure will disproportionately influence attitudes. Preliminary work suggests public 
acceptability of CCS depends on levels of concern about climate change and how it is presented. 
For example, it is more acceptable when framed as part of a portfolio of measures and as an 
alternative to nuclear. If CCS were implemented on a large scale, studies recommend early and 
thorough public communication of the purpose and environmental risks of CCS relative to the 
alternatives. There is a role for Government in raising awareness of this option in terms of its 
benefits and drawbacks. This activity needs to progress in parallel with the development of 
technologies, to ensure that public concerns are taken into account and properly addressed. 
Nonetheless the deployment of CCS could have appreciable impacts on the general public; for 
example in terms of the construction and operation of separation plant and transport pipelines, the 
long-term choice of fuels and energy services and the cost of these services to the consumer. 
 
 
7. Global Status of CCS at Present 
 
 It is clear from the discussion that the individual stages of CCS are technically viable but the 
challenges of integrating and scaling up these technologies can only be met through the 
experience of building and operating commercial-scale CCS facilities in a variety of settings. At 
present there are eight large-scale projects in operation around the world and a further six under 
construction, according to the GCCSI’s report, “The Global Status of CCS: 2011”. Three of these 
projects have recently commenced construction. Six out of eight operating projects are in natural 
95 
 
gas processing, while the other two are in synthetic fuel production and fertiliser production, and 
five of these projects use enhanced oil recovery (EOR).  
 
The total CO2 storage capacity of all 14 projects in operation or under construction is over 33 
million tonnes a year. This is broadly equivalent to preventing the emissions from more than six 
million cars from entering the atmosphere each year.  CCS projects are mainly concentrated in 
North America, Europe, Australia and China with few large-scale projects planned in developing 
countries.  
 
  
Figure 8 Large scale integrated projects (LSIPs) by assets lifecycle and region/country (Source: 
GCSSI report on Status of CCS 2011) 
 
It is vital that the lessons learned from demonstration projects in developed countries are 
conveyed to developing countries, and that capacity development activities and customised 
project support are undertaken so that these countries can eventually deploy CCS. 
 
Table 3: Large scale integrated projects (LSIPs) in the Operate and Execute stages 
 
Name Location Capture type Volume CO2 
(MTPA) 
Storage type Date of 
operation 
Operate stage      
Shute Creek Gas 
Processing Facility 
United States Pre-combustion 
(gas processing) 
7 EOR  1986 
96 
 
Sleipner CO2 
Injection 
Norway Pre-combustion 
(gas processing) 
1 Deep saline 
formation 
1996 
Val Verde Natural 
Gas Plants 
United States Pre-combustion 
(gas processing) 
1.31 EOR 1972 
Great Plains 
Synfuels Plant and 
Weyburn-Midale 
Project 
United 
States/Canada 
Pre-combustion 
(synfuels) 
3 EOR with 
MMV 
2000 
Enid Fertilizer 
Plant 
United States Pre-combustion 
(fertilizer) 
0.7 EOR 1982 
In Salah CO2 
Storage  
Algeria Pre-combustion 
(gas processing) 
1 Deep saline 
formation 
2004 
Snøhvit CO2 
Injection 
Norway Pre-combustion 
(gas processing) 
0.7 Deep saline 
formation 
2008 
Century Plant United States Pre-combustion 
(gas processing) 
5 (and 3.5 in 
construction) 
EOR 2010 
Execute stage      
Lost Cabin Gas 
Plant 
United States Pre-combustion 
(gas processing) 
1 EOR 2012 
Illinois Industrial 
Carbon Capture 
and Sequestration 
(ICCS) Project 
United States Industrial (ethanol 
production) 
1 Deep saline 
formation 
2013 
Boundary Dam 
with CCS 
Demonstration 
Canada Post-combustion 
(power) 
1 EOR 2014 
Agrium CO2 
Capture with 
ACTL  
Canada Pre-combustion 
(fertilizer) 
0.6 EOR 2014 
Kemper County 
IGCC Project  
United States Pre-combustion 
(power) 
3.5 EOR 2014 
Gorgon Carbon 
Dioxide Injection 
Project 
Australia Pre-combustion 
(gas processing) 
3.4-4 Deep saline 
formation 
2015 
 
 
Acknowledgement 
 
This paper is the result of thorough study of articles and reports prepared by   various 
organizations on CCS technologies and its feasibility. We appreciate the roadmap prepared by 
International Energy Agency for the deployment of CCS technologies in the world and efforts 
made by GCCSI (Global CCS Institute), IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel for Climate Change) 
and various private organizations that have great concern for climate change and aiming to 
reduce CO2 emission. 
 
97 
 
References 
 
IPCC, (2005): IPCC Special Report on Carbon Dioxide Capture and Storage. Prepared by 
Working Group III of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Metz, B.,O. 
Davidson, H. C. de Coninck, M. Loos, and L. A. Meyer (eds.)] Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, 442 pp. 
IPCC, (2000a). Special Report on Emission Scenarios, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 
UK. 
IPCC, 2001.  The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), IPCC Third Assessment 
Report - Climate Change 2001. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 2001. 
IEA GHG, 2004: Improvements in power generation with post combustion capture of CO2, 
report PH4/33, Nov. 2004, IEA Greenhouse Gas R&D Programme, Cheltenham, UK. 
IEA GHG, 2002: Transmission of CO2 and Energy, IEA Greenhouse Gas R&D Programme, 
Report PH4/6, IEA GHG, Cheltenham, UK (March). 
IEA, (2009), Technology roadmap carbon capture and storage. http://www.iea.org 
Anderson Soren ,Newell Richard,(2003) ,Prospects for Carbon Capture and Storage 
Technologies, Resources for the Future, 1616 P Street, NW Washington, D.C. 20036 
Beynon Eric, Craig Robert, (February 2011), CO2-storage background, ICO2N, 6th Avenue S.W. 
Calgary, Alberta, http// www.ico2n.com. 
The Boston Consulting Group, (2008), Carbon capture and storage a solution to the problem of 
carbon emissions, http//www.bcg.com/publications. 
Science for Environment Policy,(April 2008),Special issue 3,Carbon capture and storage, 
http://ec.europa.eu/environment/integration/research/newsalert/themes_en.html 
DNV (Det Norske Veritas), 2010. CO2QUALSTORE: Guidelines for selection and qualification 
of sites and projects for geological storage of CO2 
Forward Keith, (July - August 2009) issue 10, carbon capture journal, Karl Jeffery, 
http//www.carboncapturejournal.com 
IEA (2008c), CCS Roadmap Meeting: Technology Focus, Meeting Notes of 6-7 November 2008, 
http://www.iea.org/Textbase/subjectqueries/ccs/Roadmap_Summary.pdf 
DTI,(2003), Review of the Feasibility of Carbon Dioxide Capture and Storage in the UK, 
DTI/Pub URN 03/1261 
POSTnote,(March 2005), Number 238, Carbon capture and storage, The Parliamentary Office of 
Science and Technology, 7 Millbank, London 
Stern, N. (2007), Stern Review: The Economics of Climate Change, H.M Treasury, 
www.hmtreasury.gov.uk/stern_review_report.htm 
IEA (2008a),  Energy Technology Perspectives 2008, IEA/OECD, Paris 
Zero Emissions Platform, (july2011), The Costs of CO2 Capture, Transport and Storage http// 
www.zeroemissionsplatform.eu 
http://www.ipcc.ch/. 
http://www.iea.org. 
http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/climatechange/internat/devcountry/pdf/techtransfer-
fullreport.pdf. 
http://www.ccsassociation.org/. 
http//www.jrc.nl 
http//www.cslforum.org 
http//www.globalccsinstitute.com 
 
98 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
DOMESTIC WASTEWATER TREATMENT IN NORTH EASTERN REGION OF INDIA 
THROUGH FACULTATIVE LAGOON–POLISHING POND SYSTEM 
 
 
Harikrishna Bala1 and Mohammad Jawed2 
 
 
ABSTRACT: Hilly topography, extended rainy season, long power outages and lack of skilled 
manpower in cities and sub-urban centers of north-eastern region of India makes design, 
development and operation & maintenance of domestic wastewater treatment facilities 
challenging. A wastewater treatment system comprising of two facultative lagoons in series 
connection followed by a polishing pond is designed, constructed and commissioned in an 
academic residential campus with its routine operation and maintenance outsourced to an 
unskilled private enterprise – first of its kind in the north-eastern region. The surface aerators 
installed in facultative lagoons are operated during day times with pumping of wastewater while 
aeration and pumping of wastewater is stopped during night times. The plant performance has 
been monitored for 4 months during rainy season. The investigations indicate that the average 
suspended solids removal through grit chamber is 14-52% only due to non-installation of flow 
control device. The DO level increases along the treatment chain – zero DO in influent to grit 
chamber to 6.0–19.6 mg/L in effluent of polishing pond. The effluent COD of facultative lagoon 
(FL)–2 and polishing pond are fluctuating near 50 mg/L indicating stable and consistent 
performance of treatment plant. The observed DO levels are higher during day time compared to 
night time in both the facultative lagoons. Consistently higher DO levels of more 10 mg/L in both 
the lagoons up to a depth of 3.0–4.0 m during day times indicates presence of aerobic conditions 
from the top to very close to bottom due to excessive aeration. The vertical DO levels come down 
to less than 1 mg/L for FL–1 but not for FL–2 during night times with switched-off mode of 
surface aerators indicating that FL–2 is functioning as an aerobic lagoon all the times.  
 
1. Introduction 
 
Hilly topography, extended wet weather condition (7–8 months in a year), long power outages 
and lack of skilled manpower in the north-eastern region of India makes design, development and 
operation & maintenance of domestic wastewater treatment facilities more challenging. The 
treatment facilities become the first causality of severe power shortages. Hence, a treatment 
system which is not dependent on continuous power supply, does not produce excess sludge 
                                                
1Graduate Student, Department of Civil Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, Guwahati – 
718039, India.  
2Professor, Department of Civil Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, Guwahati – 
718039, India. jawed@iitg.ernet.in 
 
99 
 
requiring large sludge drying beds, least affected by lack of skilled manpower, suitable for 
treating wastewater produced from small population and close to natural form of treatment is the 
requirement of the region. These requirements are likely to be fully met with lagoon and pond 
systems of wastewater treatment. Lagoons are earthen basins retaining the wastewater for 
sufficiently longer duration to allow natural stabilization processes to occur. Facultative lagoons 
are the most preferred one and it consists of three functional zones – bottom portion being the 
anaerobic zone, the top portion being the aerobic zone and the intermediate portion being the 
facultative zone (Peavy et al., 1985) with considerable biological interactions occurring amongst 
the zones. Oxygen in facultative lagoon is supplied primarily through mechanical surface aerators 
making the aerobic-anaerobic facultative interface more stable. 
   The lagoon and pond system of wastewater treatment has been investigated for selected quality 
parameters or the specific treatment processes itself. Balasha and Sperbher (1974) studied 
treatment of domestic wastes in an aerated lagoon followed by polishing pond and observed that 
the dissolved oxygen (DO) was higher near the aerator and decreased with increasing distance 
from the aerator in depth as well as in length. Roberto et al. (2008) observed 78-96% removal 
efficiency for indicator microorganisms in a facultative pond. Moodie et al. (1981) studied 
treatment of meatworks wastewater by two anaerobic lagoons in parallel followed by a 
facultative lagoon and two aerobic lagoons. The lagoon effluent contained considerable amount 
of algae contributing suspended solids and chemical oxygen demand (COD). Garcia et al. (2005) 
investigated diurnal variations in contaminant removal in high rate ponds (HRP) treating urban 
wastewater. The diurnal rhythm of the algal photosynthetic activity in the mixed liquor of HRP 
caused variations of DO and pH during the day. Both DO and pH peaked at midday and attained 
the lowest values at night. Maiga et al. (2009) investigated sunlight inactivation of Escherichia 
coli in eight outdoors microcosms filled up to different depths with maturation pond wastewater. 
The observed sunlight inactivation rates were 16 and 24 times higher than the corresponding dark 
inactivation rates respectively in cold and warm season. Melo et al. (2000) investigated 
longitudinal distribution and vertical profile of DO in a partially aerated pond with a 
polishing/integral settling compartment used for treatment of industrial effluents. However, no 
studies are available evaluating unit-wise performance of lagoon–pond system of domestic 
wastewater treatment operated and maintained by an outsourced private enterprise with unskilled 
manpower.  
   An academic residential campus has installed facultative lagoon–polishing pond system of 
domestic wastewater treatment – first of its kind in entire north-eastern region of the country. The 
schematic of treatment plant is shown in Fig. 1 while brief design summary is presented in Table 
1. The plant is in operation for the last 6 years with day-to-day operation and maintenance 
outsourced to a private enterprise. The installed surface aerators in facultative lagoons are 
operated during day time between 6 AM to 6.30 PM on most of the days along with pumping of 
the wastewater whereas neither the aerators are operated nor the wastewater pumped in to the 
plant during night time between 6.30 PM to 6 AM. Unfortunately, no attempts were made to 
evaluate the performance of this wastewater treatment plant since its commissioning. The results 
of performance monitoring may highlight the corrective measures required, if any, to improve the 
overall management of treatment. In addition, consistent performance may assist in assessing 
feasibility of installing similar plants in other locations of the north-eastern region. This paper 
presents the results of performance monitoring of facultative lagoon–polishing pond system of 
domestic wastewater treatment plant carried out over a period of 4 months of rainy season during 
September 2008 and April–June 2009. 
100 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Figure 1 Schematic of facultative lagoon–polishing pond system of domestic wastewater 
treatment 
 
Table 1 Brief design summary of facultative lagoon–polishing pond system of domestic 
wastewater treatment  
 
Parameter Value 
Population 10000 
Water supply 135 lpcd 
Sewage: water supply ratio 1:1 (assumed) 
Wastewater flow rate (sewage) 1350 m3/d 
Wastewater 
BOD 200 mg/L (assumed) 
Average grit size 0.15 mm (assumed) 
Specific gravity of grit particle 2.65 
Channel cross sectional shape Parabolic 
Length of grit chamber 10 m 
Grit  
Chamber 
Horizontal velocity control section Fixed width section 
Influent BOD  200 mg/L 
Detention time 3 d 
Volume 4050 m3 
Mean dimension 42 m × 22 m × 4.5 m  
Facultative 
Lagoon – 1  
Surface aerator capacity provided 2 No. of 5 HP 
Influent BOD  50 mg/L (assumed) 
Detention time 3 d  
Volume 4050 m3 
Mean dimension 42 m × 22 m × 4.5 m   
Facultative 
Lagoon – 2  
Surface aerator capacity provided 2 No. of 5 HP 
Influent BOD 20 mg/L (assumed) 
Detention time 12 h 
Volume  675 m3 
Polishing 
Pond 
Mean dimension 42 m × 13.5 m × 1.2 m  
 
2. Materials and Methods 
 
The performance of individual treatment units of the plant was assessed in terms of selected 
parameters as presented in Table 2. Grab samples were withdrawn during day times once a 
week/fortnight and analyzed as per Standard Methods (APHA, 2005) for performance studies. 
The samples were also withdrawn from facultative lagoons at three selected locations (marked as 
A, B and C) [Fig. 2(a)] from different depths [Fig. 2 (b)] to prepare DO profiles along the depth  
Disposal Grit 
Chamber 
Facultative 
Lagoon – 1   
Facultative 
Lagoon – 2  
Polishing 
Pond 
Sump 
Well 
101 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
Figure 2 (a) Top view of sampling locations in Facultative Lagoons (b) Sectional view along X–X of sampling depth at locations A, B and 
C (c) Set-up used for collection of DO samples 
(b) 
(a) 
(c) 
102 
 
Table 2 Selected wastewater quality parameters for performance monitoring 
 
Parameters  Samples withdrawn from  
Physical Suspended solids Influent & effluent of grit chamber 
Dissolved oxygen (DO) Chemical Chemical oxygen demand (COD) 
Effluent of facultative lagoons, 
polishing pond 
Biological Total coliform (MPN technique) Effluent of grit chamber, facultative lagoons, polishing pond 
 
during day and night times. The DO samples were collected directly in a BOD bottle from 
desired sampling location/depth using a straight bamboo pole of approximately 5.5 m length. A 
metallic stand was fixed at one end of the bamboo pole to keep the BOD bottle. The bamboo pole 
was calibrated from neck of the bottle upwards to mark depths as shown in Fig. 1(c). An empty 
stoppered BOD bottle was kept on the metallic stand and tied with the bamboo pole. The stopper 
of BOD bottle was tied with a separate thick nylon thread with loose end of the thread tied to the 
opposite end of the pole.  After lowering the bottle to the desired depth at the selected sampling 
location, the bottle stopper was opened by pulling it out by the attached nylon thread and the 
bottle was filled with sample by giving gentle jerks to the bamboo pole. Once the bottle was 
filled with sample (no bubbles visible along the bamboo pole), the bottle was lifted up and 
stoppered immediately. The DO was fixed in the collected sample at the site using modified 
Azide-Winkler method (APHA, 2005) while titration was carried out later on in the laboratory to 
estimate DO levels. 
 
3. Results and Discussion 
 
The performance monitoring of all the units of the treatment plant were carried out during raining 
season in September 2008 and April–June 2009. The results are presented in subsequent 
paragraphs.    
   The suspended solid levels in influent to and effluent from grit chamber varied from a 
minimum value of 38 mg/L to a maximum value of 654 mg/L with average variation in the range 
of 55-381 mg/L (Fig. 3). The average suspended solids removal was observed in the range of 14-
52% only. The horizontal flow velocity of the wastewater in the grit chamber was also measured 
prior to each sampling by recording the time taken by a float (a small piece of paper) to pass 
through a marked measured length of chamber. The horizontal flow velocity was observed to 
vary in the range of 0.40 to 0.48 m/s which was higher than the fixed design value of 0.30 m/s. A 
visual inspection revealed that the outlet section of the grit chamber has not been provided with 
the velocity control device (Fig. 4) – a must to control horizontal velocity at the fixed design 
value.  Also, both the channels of grit chamber were used simultaneously for grit removal 
whereas in practice, one channel of the grit chamber is used for grit separation while the other 
channel is taken off-line for removal of deposited grit materials.   
   The variations in DO and COD levels through individual units are presented in Fig. 5 and 6 
respectively. The collected influent samples of grit chamber yielded white precipitates with 
addition of DO fixing chemical reagents indicating absence of DO. The DO levels were observed 
to increase along the treatment chain – zero DO value in the grit chamber, increased in the range 
of 1.2 to 7.6 mg DO/L in facultative lagoon (FL)–1, 6.0 to 10.9 mg DO/L in FL–2 and 6.0 to 19.6 
mg DO/L in polishing pond. A careful inspection of polishing pond indicated presence of large 
103 
 
quantity of algae which probably have added more DO (higher than the saturation levels) during 
day time due to photosynthetic reaction. The plant operators used to harvest excess algae on 
many occasions during the course of study. The COD levels entering to FL–1 varied in the range 
of 60-165 mg/L (with variation in average value ranged 44-110 mg/L) whereas the COD of 
effluents of FL–2 and polishing pond were observed to fluctuate near 50 mg/L value. It indicated 
relatively stable and consistent performance in terms of COD stabilization through the plant.    
    
 
  
 
 
Figure 3 Variations in suspended solids level in influent to and effluent from grit chamber 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4 Grit chamber in operation without horizontal velocity control devices 
  
104 
 
   
 
 
 
Figure 5 Variations in DO levels in effluents of monitored units 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6 Variations in COD levels in effluents of monitored units 
 
 
    
105 
 
   The typical variations in total coliform group of microorganisms (log of MPN values) through 
monitored units are represented in Fig. 7. The total coliform levels were observed to decrease 
across the individual units in the treatment chain – more clearly towards the later phase of 
monitoring. The reduction in microorganism levels from the grit chamber effluent to the 
polishing pond effluents in terms of log values were approximately 3.  
 
 
 
Figure 7 Typical variations in total coliform levels through monitored units 
 
   The surface aerators installed in facultative lagoons were operated during day time only but not 
round-the-clock as required by the design consideration. In order to assess the availability of DO 
in the lagoons, the vertical distribution of DO at selected locations in both the lagoons during day 
(with surface aerators in operation) and night (with surface aerators not in operation) times were 
prepared. For this purpose, samples were withdrawn during day time between 2 to 4 PM from 
various depths at three selected locations in lagoons after aeration was imparted for 
approximately 6-7 h. Similarly, samples were also withdrawn during night time between 12 to 
2.30 AM from various depths at three selected locations in lagoons after aeration was stopped 
and treatment plant was not functional for approximately 5-6 h. While withdrawing samples from 
the bottom most depth of facultative lagoons, a large quantity of solid particles was observed in 
the samples. When chemical reagents added to fix DO in the collected samples, it yielded white 
precipitate indicating absence of DO. However, it is difficult to rule out the impact of solid 
particles on DO estimation. Nevertheless, the estimated DO levels of the samples obtained from 
various depths of three selected locations in facultative lagoons were used to prepare the typical 
vertical distribution of DO which are presented in Fig. 8 and 9 for FL–1 and  FL–2  respectively. 
It is observed that the DO levels were relatively higher during day time compared to night time in 
both the lagoons. The observed DO levels were close to or more than 10 mg/L up to a depth of 
3.0 m in FL–1 (Fig. 8) and 4.0 m in FL–2 (Fig. 9) during day time while the DO levels were less  
106 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8 Typical vertical distribution of DO in FL–1 
Figure 9 Typical vertical distribution of DO in FL–2  
End Point  
(12.5 m away from aerator) 
Starting Point  
(near aerator) 
End Point  
(12.5 m away from aerator) 
Center Point  
(6.25 m away from aerator) 
0
2
4
6
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14
DO (mg/L)
D
ep
th
 (m
)
Day time (2PM - 3PM) (01/06/2009)
Night time (12AM - 1AM) (03/06/2009)
0
2
4
6
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14
DO (mg/L)
Day time (2PM - 3PM) (01/06/2009)
Night time (12AM - 1AM) (03/06/2009)
0
2
4
6
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14
DO (mg/L)
Day time (2PM - 3PM) (01/06/2009)
Night time (12AM - 1AM) (03/06/2009)
0
2
4
6
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14
DO (mg/L)
D
ep
th
 (m
)
Day time (3PM - 4PM) (01/06/2009)
Night time (1AM - 2AM) (03/06/2009)
0
2
4
6
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14
DO (mg/L)
Day time (3PM - 4PM) (01/06/2009)
Night time (1AM - 2AM) (03/06/2009)
0
2
4
6
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14
DO (mg/L)
Day time (3PM - 4PM) (01/06/2009)
Night time (1AM - 2AM) (03/06/2009)
Center Point  
(6.25m away from aerator) 
Starting Point  
(near aerator) 
End Point  
(12.5 m away from aerator) 
107 
 
than 1 mg/L in FL–1 (Fig. 8) and close to 2 mg/L in FL–2 (Fig. 9) along the depths during night 
times. Also, it is observed that the DO levels were lower in FL–1 compared to FL–2 which was 
logical as FL–1 received fresh wastewater with higher COD levels (maximum average influent 
COD of 110 mg/L) while FL–2 received lower COD levels (maximum average influent COD of 
84 mg/L). If 75% of the recorded maximum average COD value of 110 mg/L is considered as the 
influent BOD of the wastewater then the estimated initial BOD of wastewater may be much 
lower than the adopted design BOD value of 200 mg/L. In addition to these observations, higher 
DO levels were present till close to the bottom of the lagoons during day times when surface 
aerators were in operation. It indicated excess aeration during day time which made the lagoon to 
function as an aerobic lagoon in place of a facultative lagoon – contradicting the very basis of 
design on which this treatment system has been conceived. During non-operation of aerators in 
night times, the vertical DO levels came down to less than 1 mg/L for FL–1 but not for FL–2 
indicating that FL–2 is functioning as an aerobic lagoon for most of the time. It is possibly due to 
lower organic load with provision of higher capacity of aerators than the required ones. Based 
upon actual organic load, FL–1 requires only one surface aerator of 5 HP (in place of 2 numbers 
of 5 HP already installed) while FL–2 requires only one surface aerator of 2 HP (in place of 2 
numbers of 5 HP already installed). 
 
4. Summary 
 
The investigations carried out in this study are summarized as: (a) The average suspended solids 
removal through grit chamber is 14-52% only due to non-installation of flow control device. (b) 
The DO levels are observed to increase along the treatment chain – zero DO in influent to grit 
chamber to 6.0–19.6 mg/L in effluent of polishing pond. (c) The effluent COD of FL–2 and 
polishing pond are observed to fluctuate near 50 mg/L indicating stable and consistent 
performance of treatment plant. (d) The adopted design value of influent BOD as 200 mg/L is 
very high compared to maximum average influent COD value of 110 mg/L. (e) The observed DO 
levels are higher during day time compared to night time in both the facultative lagoons. (f) 
Consistently higher DO levels of more than 10 mg/L for both the lagoons up to a depth of 3.0–4.0 
m during day times indicates presence of aerobic conditions from the top to very close to bottom 
mainly due to provision of higher capacity surface aerators. (g) The vertical DO levels come 
down to less than 1 mg/L for FL–1 but not for FL–2 during night times with switched-off mode 
of surface aerators indicating that FL–2 is functioning as an aerobic lagoon all the times. 
  
References 
 
APHA (2005). Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, 21st Ed., 
Published by American Public Health Association, American Water Works Association and 
Water Environment Federation, DC, USA.  
Balasha, E. and Sperbher, H. (1974). Treatment of Domestic Wastes in an Aerated Lagoon and 
Polishing Pond, Water Research, 9: 43–49.  
Garcia, J., Green, B.F., Lundquist, T., Mujeriego, R., Hernandez, M.M. and Oswald, W.J. (2005). 
Long term diurnal variations in contaminant removal in high rate ponds treating urban 
wastewater, Bioresource Technology, 97: 1709–1715.  
Maiga, Y., Denyigba, K., Joseph, W. and Quattare, A.S. (2009). Sunlight inactivation of 
Escherichia coli in waste stabilization microcosms in a sahelian region, Journal of 
Photochemistry and Photobiology B: Biology, 94: 113–119.  
108 
 
Melo, H.N.S., Guimaraes, P. and Melo, J.L.S. (2000). Longitudinal distribution and vertical 
profile of pH, temperature and dissolved oxygen in a partially aerated facultative pond, Water 
Science and Technology, 42(10–11): 75–81.  
Moodie, P.S., Kavanaoh, V.B. and Smith,  G.M. (1981). Coliform and chemical oxygen demand 
removal from meatworks effluents by different treatment processes, Water Research, 15: 
1259–1263.  
Peavy, H.S., Row, D.R. and Technobanglous, G. (1985). Environmental Engineering, McGraw-
Hill Book Company, New Delhi, India.  
Roberto, R., Alexandra, T., Linda, T. and Eloy, B. (2008). Efficiency of natural systems for 
removal of bacteria and pathogenic parasites from wastewater, Science of the Total 
Environment, 395: 80–86.  
 
 
109 
 
 ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
 A MODIFIED METHOD FOR STABILITY ANALYSIS OF  UNSATURATED  
RESIDUAL SOIL HILL  SLOPES 
 
 
Utpal Kumar Das1 and  Bibha Das Saikia2   
 
 
ABSTRACT:  Landslide is one of the major natural disasters in the North Eastern part of India.  
Guwahati, the capital city of Assam, has to deal with loss of life and property almost every year 
due to landslides, the worst being 11 deaths in the year 2004.   These hills are mostly covered by 
two types of residual soils. Some of these residual soil slopes have deep ground water table and, 
as a result, are mostly unsaturated and posses high matric suction. This soil suction positively 
contributes to the shear strength of the soil and increases the stability of the slopes.  During rainy 
season, the matric suction of the soil is decreased by the percolating rain water and rise in water 
table which, in turn,  reduces the shear strength and stability of the slopes resulting in shallow 
failures. It is, therefore, important to take into account the effect of soil suction on shear strength 
during the stability analysis of these slopes for which knowledge of the  shear properties of these 
soils in unsaturated condition is a prerequisite. Considering the involvement of considerable time 
and specialized testing equipment in laboratory testing of unsaturated soils, a technique for 
prediction of unsaturated soil parameters applicable to the residual soils has its practical 
application.  
In the present work, triaxial testing was carried out on the two residual soils   and a prediction 
technique of shear strength of unsaturated soils proposed by McKee and Bumb is tested and 
modified.   Although there are several methods of slope stability analysis, the General Limit 
Equilibrium (GLE) method developed by Fredlund and Rahardjo (1993) which includes soil 
suction as an independent parameter in the computation of Factor of safety (FOS) has become one 
of the most popular methods. But the GLE method assumes a bi-linear relation between shear 
strength and matric suction of the slope. A modification of the GLE method is, therefore, 
proposed in this work by incorporating the Modified McKee and Bumb equation developed in 
this work  to take into account the nonlinear relation between shear strength and matric suction of 
unsaturated  soils. This modification of the GLE method  make the slope failure predictions more 
realistic.     
 
 
1.  Introduction 
 
Slopes in the hilly areas of North East India, which are mostly made up of residual soils, often 
exist in a state of partial saturation. Due to deep ground water table these slopes have low 
                                                
1Associate Professor, Civil Engineering Department, Tezpur University, Tezpur, India. ukrdas@gmail.com  
2Professor, Civil Engineering Dept., Royal School of Engineering and Technology, Guwahati, India. 
bibha_saikia@yahoo.com 
110 
 
saturation and high matric suction in the upper parts. The soil properties that determine basically 
the suction evolution are the water permeability  and the shape of the Soil Water Characteristic 
Curve (SWCC) or Water Retention Curve ( which gives the relationship between degree of 
saturation and suction). During rainy season many of these slopes undergo slope failure. The 
relationship between periods of rainfall and  the appearance of sliding has been repeatedly 
confirmed and studied by many researchers. [ Lumb (1962); Ho and Fredlund (1982); Brand 
(1985); Fredlund and Barbour (1992) ]. 
Conventional slope stability analysis is usually based on the effective stress parameters of the 
slope. For the residual soil hill slopes, which are unsaturated to a great extent, it is seen that the 
conventional slope stability analysis is not sufficient to explain the existence of steep geometrical 
configurations of the slopes. Ho and Fredlund (1982) and Krahn et al. (1989) have evaluated the 
safety factor increase in unsaturated slopes taking into account the suction increase obtained from 
in-situ measurements. Fredlund and Rahardjo (1993) have provided a generalized analysis of 
stability of unsaturated slopes based on an extension of Mohr-Coulomb failure criterion 
unsaturated soils of and the limit equilibrium method.  
 
 
2. Location of the Hill Slopes and Instability Description 
 
The subject hill slopes are located in and around Guwahati city, the capital of the North Eastern 
State of Assam in India.  
The most common mode of instability observed in these hill slopes is as illustrated in Figure 1. 
 
 
     
  
 
 
 
      
 
                                                
 
     Figure 1  Typical mode of failure 
 
The upper edge of the failure surface, in many cases, was some distance below the crest. The 
lower edge of the failure surface was above the toe. The slides were mostly shallow failures, the 
maximum depth between   0.5m and 3.0m. The base, in most cases, was approximately circular. 
The instability is most active during the rainy seasons.  
 
 
3. Description of the Slope Soil 
 
Field investigation of the hill slopes around Guwahati has revealed that they are made of two 
types of residual soils. A top layer of Reddish residual soil ( SOIL - I ) of thickness varying from 
few centimeters to about 30m is underlain by Light Yellowish residual soil ( SOIL – II ). The 
Max. 0.5 – 3.0 m 
111 
 
index properties of the two types of residual soils determined in the laboratory of Civil 
Engineering Department, Assam Engineering College, Guwahati, are as tabulated in Table 1.  
 
 
Table 1 Index properties and classification of  the soils 
 
Item SOIL - I SOIL – II 
Colour Reddish Light 
Yellowish 
Specific Gravity 2.44 2.64 
In-situ Bulk Density 1.65 gm/cc 1.79 gm/cc 
In-situ Dry Density 1.49 gm/cc 1.63 gm/cc 
Liquid Limit 49% 39% 
Plastic Limit 27% Non-plastic 
Co-eff. of Uniformity 2.52 5.16 
Co-eff. of Curvature 1.36 1.43 
Fines Content  72.7% 7.45% 
Classification Silty Clay Poorly 
Graded Silty 
Sand 
 
The grain size distribution curves for the two residual soils are shown in Figure 2(a) and Figure 
2(b).  
                   
 
   Figure  2(a) Grain Size Distribution curve for SOIL-I 
 
Because of the high evaporation rate in Assam’s climatic condition during dry season and 
existence of ground water table at significant depth from the hill slope surface, high matric 
suction generally exists above ground water table in hilly areas covered by residual soils around 
Guwahati. 
 
112 
 
                 
 
   Figure  2(b) Grain Size Distribution curve for SOIL-II 
 
 
4. Unsaturated Soil Shear Strength 
 
The shear strength of a soil with negative pore water pressures can play an important role in the 
stability of a slope, particularly when the slip surfaces are shallow [Krahn et al. (1989)]. Fredlund 
et al. (1978) showed that the shear strength ( τ )  of an unsaturated soil can be represented by the 
equation 
 
                    (1) 
 
where, σ = normal stress ; uw = pore water pressure ; ua = pore air pressure ; c/ is the cohesion 
intercept when the two stress variables, Net Normal Stress   and  Suction  , 
are zero ;     is the angle of internal friction with respect to changes in ; and  is  an 
angle indicating the rate of increase in shear strength with respect to changes in .  
Equation 1 describes an Extended Mohr-Coulomb Failure Surface  which is a planer surface on 
the three dimensional plot of  ,  and , as illustrated in Figure 3. 
 
 
5. Description of Equipment 
 
The shear strength of the saturated samples were measured by using the conventional triaxial 
testing equipment ( Bishop and Henkel, 1962). The triaxial equipment developed generally for 
testing saturated soils can not be used in toto for unsaturated soil. This is because the air in the 
porous stone used in the conventional saturated triaxial tests, when used in unsaturated tests, 
easily forms continuity with pore air in the sample. Thus the sample pore air pressure may pass 
through the coarse porous stone into the measuring system, resulting in error in the pore water 
pressure measurement. The conventional triaxial testing equipment for saturated soils was 
113 
 
modified as described by Fredlund and Rahardjo (1993) in the  laboratory  to suit testing of 
unsaturated samples.  In this modification to the triaxial testing equipment, the coarse porous 
stone used at the base of the sample was replaced by a ceramic plate of rated air entry value and 
the pedestal of the triaxial cell was specially fabricated with a recess at the top to accommodate 
the ceramic plate.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                 
  Figure 3  Extended Mohr-Coulomb Failure Surface 
 
6. Sample Preparation and Testing Procedure 
 
For preparation of samples for triaxial tests, the soil collected from field was air dried, manually 
pulverized and screened through IS 2.36mm sieve. Water content of this soil was adjusted to 
about 12%. The soil was then carefully tamped in five layers in a mould to a density equal to the 
in-situ density of the soil.For the unsaturated tests, the reconstituted samples were tested under 
constant water content(CW) condition at constant rate of axial strain after isotropic consolidation 
at 50kPa, 100kPa and 150 kPa. The appropriate rate of axial strain was determined 
experimentally by carrying out triaxial tests, each at a different rate of axial strain. The suction in 
the soil sample was measured by using the Axis Translation Technique (Hilf, 1956). In this 
technique, the triaxial cell pressure and the sample pore air pressure are simultaneously increased 
in equal increments until the pore water pressure in the sample becomes positive. The difference 
between the measured pore air and pore water pressures of an unsaturated sample gives the 
suction present in the sample. In the constant water content(CW)  test, the air phase of the sample 
is kept in drained condition while the water phase is kept in undrained condition. 
 
 
7. Presentation of Test Results 
 
7.1 Soil Water Characteristics and Permeabilty 
Shear strength of unsaturated soil is affected by the Soil-Water Characteristic Curve (SWCC) of 
the soil. The relationship between the water content or degree of saturation (Sr%) and the suction 
 (σ – ua) 
τ 
φ/ 
 φb 
(ua - uw) 
c/ 
114 
 
of a soil is generally referred to as Soil-Water Characteristic Curve (SWCC).Figure 4(a) and 
Figure 4(b) show the SWCC of the two types of residual soils under study, i.e. reddish silty clay 
(SOIL-I) and yellowish silty sand (SOIL-II) respectively, from the hills around Guwahati. The 
SWCC in Figure 4(a) and Figure 4(b) were established in the laboratory by using the Modified 
Triaxial Testing Equipment.    
 
The SWCC for the silty clay in Figure 4(a) shows that the water content of the soil decreases very 
slowly up to a suction of 35kPa of the soil, after which it shows more pronounced decrease in 
water content of the soil with increase of suction. This indicates a desaturation of the sample 
when suction exceeds 35kPa. This value of suction after which the soil starts to desaturate is 
referred to as the Air Entry Value of the soil. The Air Entry Value of the reddish silty clay soil 
under study is 35kPa. Figure 4(a) also shows that the water content falls at a considerably slower 
rate after suction exceeds  80kPa, which indicates that the rate of desaturation of the silty clay 
considerably decreases beyond a suction of 80kPa. 
 
                     
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
0 50 100 150 200
Suction in K Pa
Sr
 %
35KPa
Air 
Entry 
Value
Residual Saturation = 31%
 
 
 
                            Figure 4(a) : Soil-water Characteristic Curve for the Reddish Silty Clay (SOIL-I) 
 
                     
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
0 20 40 60 80 100 120
Suction K Pa
Sr
%
Air Entry Value = 9 KPa
 
                    Figure 4(b) : Soil-water Characteristic Curve for the Yellowish Silty Sand (SOIL-II) 
 
115 
 
The Soil-Water Characteristic Curve  for the yellowish silty sand in Figure 4(b) shows that the air 
entry value for this residual soil is 9kPa and the rate of desaturation decrease considerably beyond 
a suction of 30kPa.   
Residual Saturations (Sres) of  each of the two soils are determined from the respective  log-log 
plots of Effective Degree of Saturation (Se) vs. Suction (ua – uw) following the procedure 
presented by Fredlund and Rahardjo (1993). Se is defined as  
 
                        
resS1
resSrS
eS


                                                                                     (2) 
 
where, Sr = Degree of Saturation of the soil. 
The Pore Size Distribution Index () for each soil are also determined from two log-log plots of 
Se vs. Suction (Das,2010). Sres and   for the silty clay are found to be 31% and 1.08 respectively. 
For the silty sand, the values of  Sres and  are determined as 33% and 2.37 respectively. The  
values for the two residual soils indicate that the silty clay has wider range of pore size 
distribution than the silty sand, whereas in the silty sand, the pore sizes are more uniformly 
distributed.  
The saturated co-efficient of permeability, ks, of the two residual soils were measured in  the  
laboratory  using  the  Triaxial Testing Equipment. The values of ks for the reddish silty clay and 
the yellowish silty sand were observed to be 1.864 x 10-7 m/sec and 1.208x10-6 m/sec 
respectively.  
Lower air entry value, faster rate of sample desaturation with increase in suction and higher value 
of  saturated co-efficient of permeability of the silty sand in comparison to silty clay can be 
attributed to the lower fines content and uniform distribution of pore sizes of the silty sand. 
 
 
7.2  Shear Strength Characteristics 
 
The shear strength characteristics of the two types of residual soils under study were evaluated by 
using Constant Water Content Triaxial Tests ( CW Tests) in the Modified Triaxial Equipment ( 
Fredlund and Rahardjo, 1993). The tests were conducted at constant rate of axial strain. To select 
the appropriate strain rate, CW Tests of the reddish silty clay samples were conducted in the 
Modified Triaxial Equipment under strain rates of 0.12mm/min, 0.06mm/min, 0.0386mm/min 
and 0.024mm/min. The results of the tests are shown in Figure 5(a) and Figure 5(b).  
 
It is apparent from Figure 5(a)  that the rate of axial strain practically has no significant effect on 
the deviator stress(σ1-σ3) vs. axial strain relation. It is seen from the Change in Matric Suction vs. 
Axial Strain relation in Figur 5(b) that the curves at lower strain rates of 0.0386mm/min and 
0.024mm/min are almost identical, whereas the curves at higher strain rates of 0.12mm/min and 
0.06mm/min have marked deviation from curves at lower strain rates. It is, therefore, concluded 
that the strain rate of 0.0386mm/min is adequate for complete equalization of the induced pore 
water pressure for residual soils under this study. 
 
Constant Water Content Tests (CW Tests) for the two residual soils were conducted under 
constant net normal stresses, (σ-ua), of 50kPa, 100kPa and 150kPa. For each net normal stress, 
samples with increasing value of initial saturation were tested. From the test results it is observed 
116 
 
that shear strength of each of the two residual soils increase as the matric suction is increased 
(Das,2010) . 
       
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
0 5 10 15 20
Strain %
Series1
Series2
Series3
Series4
Strain 
(σ
1 
- 
σ
3)
 in
 k
Pa
0.12mm/min
0.06mm/min
0.0386mm/min
0.024mm/min
 
                  Figure 5(a) Effect  of   Axial  Strain   Rate   on     Stress-strain Characteristics  
                                      for identical samples sheared under CW conditions  
  
                 -30
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
D
el
 (u
a-
uw
)
D
(u
a-u
w
) i
n 
kP
a
Strain %
0.024mm/min
0.0386mm/min
0.06mm/min
0.12mm/min
 
 
                 Figure 5(b)  Effect  of   Axial  Strain   Rate on Change in suction Vs. Axial strain  
                                     for identical samples sheared under CW conditions  
 
From the results of the triaxial tests on saturated samples, the effective angle of internal friction, 
', and effective cohesion, c/. are determined.  The ' and c/ values for the reddish silty clay(SOIL-
I)  were found to be 310 and 10kPa respectively. The ' and c/ values for the yellowish silty sand 
(SOIL-II) were found to be 38.50 and 0.00 respectively. For unsaturated samples the total 
cohesion ( c ) is given by the intercept of the Extended Mohr-Coulomb failure envelope 
117 
 
(Fredlund and Rahardjo, 1993) in the Shear Strength () vs. Suction  (ua-uw) plane. The total 
cohesion( c ) of unsaturated sample is the result of the combined effect of effective cohesion (c/) 
and apparent cohesion due to the soil suction. The total cohesion ( c ) for a sample with suction 
(ua-uw) was obtained by drawing a tangent to the single Mohr’s circle with a slope equal to the 
saturated '. The  vs. (ua-uw) plots thus obtained from the results of the unsaturated triaxial tests 
of the silty clay and the silty sand are shown in Figure 6 and Figure 7 respectively.  
 
               
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
0 50 100 150 200 250
Matric Suction KPa
Sh
ea
r S
tre
ng
th
 K
 P
a
310=f′
16.70= fb 
Experimental
Results
 
       Figure 6 : Failure envelope on  versus (ua-uw) plane for the Silty  Clay residual soil (SOIL-I) 
 
               
0
5
10
15
20
25
0 20 40 60 80 100
Matric Suction in kPa
Sh
ea
r S
tre
ng
th
 in
 k
Pa
38.50 = f'
7.50= fb
Experimental Results
 
       Figure 7 : Failure envelope on  versus (ua-uw) plane for the Silty Sand residual soil(SOIL-II) 
  
 
118 
 
Fig.6 shows that for the silty clay, the b angle describing the rate of change in shear strength due 
to change in matric suction was found to be 310 up to a suction of 40kPa. This shows that the 
value of b up to suction nearly equal to the air entry value of the silty clay is equal to the ' 
value.  Beyond a suction of 140 kPa, the curve is found to be almost linear with a b value of 
16.70. The curve is non-linear between suction of 40kPa and 140kPa, which indicates that b 
varies from 310 to 16.70 as suction increases from 40kPa to 140kPa for the silty clay residual soil.  
 
In Fig.7 it is seen that for the silty sand, up to a suction of 9kPa, b  is equal to 38.50, which is 
equal to ' value for the soil. This shows that up to air entry value of the silty sand, b is equal to 
'. Beyond a suction of 40kPa, the curve is linear with a b value of 7.50. Between suction values 
equal to air entry value of the soil and 40kPa the curve is non-linear and b varies from 38.50 to 
7.50. 
 
 
8.  Prediction of Shear Strength of the unsaturated residual soil 
 
The difference between shear strength of saturated and unsaturated soils lies in the effect of soil 
suction on the shear strength. From the theory of extended Mohr-coulomb failure envelope and 
the experimental observations, it is clear that the non-linearity of the failure envelope comes due 
the non-linear response of shear strength to change in soil suction. Any effort to predict the shear 
strength of unsaturated soil is, therefore, concentrated on the prediction of the non-linear failure 
envelope on   versus (ua-uw) plane.  
In this section an effort is made to predict the failure envelope on  versus (ua-uw) plane using the 
McKee and Bumb equation. Mckee and Bumb (1984) suggested an exponential relationship to 
define Effective Degree of Saturation, Se ,from soil water characteristic curve (SWCC) as: 
 
                                                                            (3) 
where,  = soil suction = (ua-uw)  and   = a fitting parameter 
Fredlund et al. (1995) proposed the following expression to predict shear strength of unsaturated 
soil from soil SWCC and saturated shear strength parameters, c  and    :  
                                       (4) 
Substituting Equation3 in Equation 4, the following closed form solution for predicting shear 
strength, for suction values greater than air entry value, was proposed:  
 
           
   
 





 





 
 tan1tantan 11 b
uuuu
bwaan
bwawa
ebuuuc               (5) 
It was suggested that a horizontal line be assumed in the suction range zero to air entry value in a 
Se vs. (ua-uw) plot. 
 
119 
 
Application of  Equation 5  necessitates the determination of the value of the fitting parameter b1. 
The values of  b1  for SOIL-I and SOIL-II  are determined from the respective Soil-Water 
Characteristic Curves ( SWCC )  in  Figure 4(a) and Figure 4(b) using the method of least squares 
and are found to be as follows: 
 
For SOIL-I,  b1 = 82   and     for SOIL-II,   b1 = 10. 
 
The predicted values of shear strength calculated using Equation 5 at (σn-ua) = 0  are observed to 
have deviated from the experimental values of   beyond the air entry values for both SOIL-I and 
SOIL-II. It is further observed that the deviations are higher with increasing suction. An attempt 
is, therefore, made to suitably modify the Equation 5 so as to obtain a better correlations between 
predictions and experimental shear strength data. 
Based on the experimental results presented in Figure 6 and Figure 7, the following modified  
shear strength prediction equation is now proposed.  
 























 tan108.1tan)(tan)( 1
)(
1
)( b
uu
uu
bwaan
bwa
bwa ebuuuc      (6)  
 
The above equation shall now be called  McKee and Bumb Revised  Prediction Equation for 
shear strength of unsaturated soils. 
From comparison of the experimental values of shear strength and the Shear Strength predicted 
using Equation 6, it is observed that the predicted curve is in good agreement with the 
experimental values for both SOIL-I and SOIL-II.  
 
 
9. Stability analysis of unsaturated residual soil slopes 
 
Rainwater infiltration into the slope soil changes the degree of saturation or moisture content of 
the soil, which in turn changes the negative pore water pressure, i.e. matric suction, profile of the 
slope soil with respect to depth. The suction profile under different rainfall intensities are 
determined by carrying out seepage analysis . The presence of matric suction contributes to the 
shear strength of soil, which has been quantified by establishing Equation 6 for the soils under 
study. In stability analysis of a slope, the factor of safety (FOS) of the slope along an assumed 
slip surface  is computed. Other factors remaining same, any decrease in shear strength due to 
loss of soil suction will decrease the FOS. A value of FOS lower than unity means that the slope 
will fail along the assumed slip surface. 
 
Literature shows that there are several methods of slope stability analysis   based on limit 
equilibrium method. Out of these methods the General Limit Equilibrium (GLE) method 
(Fredlund and Rahardjo, 1993)  encompasses most of the assumptions used by the various 
methods and may be used to analyse both circular and non-circular failure surfaces. The GLE 
method has become one of the most popular methods in view of its universal applicability 
(Abramson et al., 1996). The  GLE   incorporates the shear strength contribution from the soil 
suctions in the factor of safety equations. Calculations for the stability of a slope are performed 
120 
 
by dividing the soil mass above the slip surface into several vertical slices. This methods 
calculates the  mobilized shear force at the base of a slice  by using  the  unsaturated shear 
strength equation,  given in Equation 1,  as follows 
 
  bwaanm uuucFS 
 tan)(tan)(        (7) 
where, 
mS  = mobilized shear force at the base of a slice   
F  = Factor of safety. 
  = sloping distance across the base of the slice. 
 
In this method the value of b was taken to have a unique value when the soil became 
unsaturated and suction  developed. In other words, the GLE method described in this section, 
assumed that the additional shear strength due to suction, which comes in the form of apparent 
cohesion, increases linearly with suction, (ua-uw),  at a slope of btan . But, this research has 
shown that beyond air entry value of the soil, (ua-uw)b , the apparent cohesion due to suction has a 
nonlinear relationship with suction. Therefore, for better estimation of the stability of the 
unsaturated soils the nonlinear response of  shear strength to change in suction needs to be 
incorporated in the stability analysis. Keeping this fact in mind, the following modification of the 
GLE method is proposed in this paper. 
 
 
10. Modified General Limit Equilibrium (GLE) Method 
 
The GLE method is proposed to be modified by incorporating the shear strength 
equation(Equation 6) for unsaturated soil developed in this work. 
The relationship of apparent cohesion with suction can be written from Equation 6 as follows 
 
Apparent cohesion = 



















 






 






 tan108.1tan)( 1
)(
1
)( b
uu
uu
bwa
bwa
bwa ebuu                 (8)   
In order to include the apparent cohesion due to suction given by Equation 8  in the stability 
analysis without disturbing the original formulation of factors of safety of the GLE method, the 
following procedure is used in this work : 
At any point in the soil mass with a suction of  )( wa uu  ,   is redefined such that 
 bwa uu tan)(   apparent cohesion 
 



















 






 






 tan108.1tan)(tan)( 1
)(
1
)( b
uu
uu
bwa
b
wa
bwa
bwa ebuuuu  
121 
 
 

)(
tan108.1tan)(
tan
1
)(
1
)(
wa
b
uu
uu
bwa
b
uu
ebuu
bwa
bwa




























 






 


                   (9) 
Equation 9  gives b as a continuous function of suction, )( wa uu  or  .  For every slice, 
knowing the suction value at the bottom of the slice from seepage analysis, the value of    
for that slice is computed using Equation 9. The stability analysis is now carried out using   
  from Equation 9 in computation of  base shear in Equation 7. 
 
 
11. Conclusion 
 
It is found that the soil suction affects the shear strength of the residual soils of the hills of 
Guwahati, India. For the range of suction values used, the failure envelopes of these unsaturated 
soils are not plane surfaces. The  values for the two residual soils tested are equal to the  
values upto the respective air entry values, beyond which  increases non-linearly with the 
increase in soil suction. Since the testing of unsaturated soil is complex and time consuming, a 
predictive technique for shear strength is presented to suit the residual soils .  
A Modified method of slope stability analysis for unsaturated soils based on the General Limit 
Equilibrium method  is proposed by suitably incorporating the prediction equation for shear 
strength developed in this paper in the analysis. The modified method computes the factor of 
safety of the slopes by calculating the shear strength as a continuous function of   . This 
modification will make the stability analysis of the residual soil slopes more realistic.  
 
 
References 
  
Abramson, L. W., Lee, T. S., Sarma, S. and Boyce, G. M. (1996), Slope Stability and Stabilzation 
Methods, John Wiley and  Sons Inc., New York  
Bishop, A. W. and Henkel, D. J. (1962) The measurement of soil properties in the Triaxial Test, 
2nd. Edition, Arnold . 
Brand, E. W. (1985), Predicting the performance of residual soil slopes, Proc. 11th. International 
Conference on Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engineering, San Fancisco, Vol.5, pp.2541-
2578. 
Das, U. K. (2010) Effects of Saturation and Pore Water Pressure on Landslides in Areas of High 
Rainfall With Particular Reference to Guwahati, PhD. Thesis, Gauhati University. 
Fredlund, D.G., Morgenstern, N. R. and Widger, R. A. (1978), The shear strength of unsaturated 
soils, Canadian Geotechnical Journal. 15(3), pp. 313-321. 
Fredlund, D.G. and Rahardjo, H. (1993), Soil Mechanics for Unsaturated Soils,  John Wiley and 
Sons Inc., New York.  
122 
 
Fredlund, D.G., Vanapalli, S. K., Xing, A. and Pufahl, D. E. (1995) Predicting the shear strngth 
function for unsaturated soils using the soil-water characteristic curve, Proc. 1st. International 
Conference on Unsaturated Soils, Paris, Vol.1, pp. 63-69.  
Fredlund, D. G., Xing, A., Fredlund, M. D. and Barbour, S. L. (1996), The relationship of 
unsaturated soil shear strength to soil-water characteristic curve, Canadian Geotechnical 
Journal, Vol. 33, pp. 440-448. 
Hilf, J. W. (1956) An investigation of pore water pressure in compacted cohesive soils, Technical 
Memo, 654, USBR, Denver, Colorado, USA.  
Ho, D. Y. F. and Fredlund, D. G. (1982), A multistage triaxial test for unsaturated soils, 
Geotechnical Testing Journal, 5(1/2), pp. 18-25.  
Krahn, J. , Fredlund, D. G.  and Klassen, M. J. (1989), Effect of soil suction on slope stability at 
Notch hill, Canadian Geotechnical Journal, Vol.26, pp. 269-278.   
Lumb, P. (1962), Effects of rainstorms on slope stability, Symposium on Hong Kong Soils, pp-73-
87. 
Mckee, C. R. and Bumb, A.C.(1984), The importance of unsaturated flow parameters in 
designing a monitoring system for hazardous wastes and environmental emergencies, 
Hazardous materials control research institute national conference,Houston, pp. 50-58.  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
123 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10–12, 2012 Sylhet, Bangladesh        
 
 
 
PLANNING OF NATURAL DISASTER MANAGEMENT:  A CASE STUDY OF 
FLOODS IN INDIA 
 
 
Mubeen Beg1 and Saif Said2 
 
 
Abstract: Floods, droughts, earthquakes, cyclones are some of the natural disasters which afflict 
India frequently. Among these hazards floods are very common. This disaster has devastating 
effect on the lives of the inhabitants of certain zones, and has been responsible for the losses of 
hundreds of human lives and caused serious material losses.  In these circumstances it is 
important to develop flood defense plans to reduce such damages. The considerable spatial and 
temporal irregularities of rainfall, determines the aforementioned hydrological diversity.  
Structural and non-structural measures along with flood protection directives to maintain 
minimum requirements set out for civil protection plan in the face of this natural disaster are 
employed. This paper aims to identify effective measures for flood control in India. Several 
methods exist to protect flood prone areas: flood zoning, construction of a storage reservoir, 
derivation canals and dykes. Flood zoning is the most efficient of all methods, however, when an 
area is heavily developed, it is difficult to apply. Building a reservoir or a canal are next more 
efficient measures, but they are costly. Building protection dykes is comparatively cheap, but the 
protection offered is limited. Flood protection management by non engineering means, like: soil 
conservation and reforestation, installation of warning and forecasting systems, river surveillance 
control, emergency evacuation of population from flood susceptible zones, flood preparedness of 
the people and flood fighting, education of people are other flood protection measures. Beyond 
the simple role of designing feasible structures, the engineers should feel responsible to inform 
the manager in charges of selecting protection measures and the population concerned, of the 
actual merits and genuine protection offered by the various systems. 
   In fact owing to vastness of the country stretching between 68º and  97º  30’ E longitude and 
between latitudes 8º and  37º  North with a total area of 3.29 million Sq. Km, an ironical situation 
prevails. There are severe floods due to excessive rainfall in one part of the country, while 
another part suffers under the effect of drought.  
   The nature of the problem of floods in India determines the approach in dealing with this 
problem. So far as the Himalayans Rivers are concerned, heavy rainfall occurring in a short 
period over a vast watershed area is the principal factor in this situation. The steep slope of the 
rivers as they enter the plains increases the intensity of floods. This has been further aggravated 
by the deforestation in the upper catchment areas and the consequent soil erosion and silting of 
                                                
1 Associate Professor, Civil Engineering Department, A.M.U., Aligarh.  
2 Assistant Professor, Civil Engineering Department,  JMI, New Delhi. 
124 
 
the rivers section, which make the river shallow thereby promoting the overflow of water on the 
banks. 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
A river is the natural outlet for the cumulated run-off from precipitation over the 
watershed. The flow in the river is as variable as is the precipitation behaviour in the 
area. The considerable spatial and temporal irregularity of rain fall over the watershed 
determines the hydrological diversity. Average and moderate flow as are contained in the 
river channel, however, when precipitation is very high over the watershed and, or 
thawing of snow is very large, flood occurs exceeding the river channel capacity. The 
surplus water spreads over the flood plain as shown in figure 1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1 Typical cross section of a river valley 
 
The prospect of global climate change threatens to increase in frequency of the extreme 
precipitation events that spawn flooding. 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 2 Indo Gangetic plain 
125 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 3 Generalized block diagram of Indo Gangetic plain 
 
The Indo-Gangetic plain shown in figure 2 and 3 is the largest alluvial track of the northern India 
having three drainage systems namely the Indus , the Ganga and the Brahmputra.  Almost all 
rivers have shifted their courses due to recurring floods. Beas, Sutlej, Old Sarasvati rivers in the 
Punjab-Haryama-Rajasthan plain and Ganga, kosi and others on Gangetic plains have shifted 
their courses from tens to hundreds of kilometers. 
 
High surface run-off by ice melting and high precipitation rate resulted in the adjustment  and 
widening of valley widths, enlargement of meanders and their lateral shifting, migration of river 
courses, erosion of concave clayey bank and sandy fill on convex banks. The valleys of major 
rivers indo-Gangetic plain have open and wide flood plains, which generally range in widths of 2 
to 10 km or more. 
   Floods are more hazardous for big rivers. The Ganga, Brahmputra, Mahanadi, Godavari, 
Krishna, cauvery, Indus, Sabarmati, Narmada and Tapi river systems   are causing floods in 
India. Alaknanda, Bhagirathi, Ghagra, Ramganga, Kosi, Yamuna, Son, Damodar, Gandak, Burhi 
Gandak and Mahanadi are rivers causing floods in Bihar and Uttar Pradesh in India. The values 
of discharge and maximum water levels of Burhi Gandak at Sikandarpur are shown in Table 1 
and 2. 
 
   Table 1 Discharge of Burhi Gandak at Sikandarpur 
 
(1993) (1992)  
Water Level (m) Discharge (M3/s) Water Level (m) Discharge (M3/s) 
Month Maxa Mina Mina Maxa Mina Maxa Mina Maxa 
Jan. 47.593 47.498 36.76 52.04 47.123 47.188 22.32 27.43 
Feb. 47.733 47.483 39.68 61.71 47.223 47.588 28.54 54.68 
March 47.568 47.288 26.85 46.97 47.478 47.603 38.19 53.72 
April 47.253 47.023 13.03 26.30 47.033 47.638 22.59 49.79 
126 
 
May 47.183 47.958 11.90 24.82 46.883 47.03 14.32 22.91 
June 47.903 46.973 11.42 75.20 46.958 47.703 18.79 48.41 
July 50.838 47.408 48.14 699.12 47.338 52.268 50.54 1360.14 
Aug. 58.158 50.423 111.89 690.34 49.723 52.653 197.21 1453.13 
Sept. 49.978 47.968 95.40 514.54 49.293 52.483 302.28 1262.3 
Oct. 50.223 48.283 144.75 616.32 48.023 49.283 103.10 318.18 
Nov. 48.263 47.548 45.09 123.23 47.5 48.238 60.15 129.25 
Dec. 47.538 47.218 27.90 44.24 47.343 47.533 40.59 61.06 
 
Table 2 Maximum water level of Burhi Gandak at Sikandarpur `from 1983 to 1990  
 
Danger Level H.F.L. Year 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 
52.53 54.29/87 51.76 53.34 53.00 53.65 54.29 53.08 51.57 51.80 
 
 
Important factors for flood estimation include;  
   Selection of watershed, base period, flood frequency curve, mean annual flow, relationships 
between mean annual flow , valley storage, channel storage, precipitation characteristics, 
topography and meteorological characteristics 
  
2. Environmental Impact of Flood  
The environmental situation of flood plain becomes unhygienic during the maximum flood. The 
climate becomes damp. Formation of stagnant pools of water may become breeding places for 
mosquitoes. The climate becomes extremely detrimental to health of community. Soil and water 
pollution becomes hazardous for people of the flooded area. There was absolutely no concern 
about the quantum of water extracted or wasted. Industrial and human effluents were 
indiscriminately dumped into rivers and streams. When the population was low, such 
vandalism could be absorbed by the nature. 
 
2.1 Adverse Impact of Floods on Country Development 
   
There are immediate crises as a consequence of destruction of properties and goods, 
disruption of essential services and suspension of business. Gigantic task of rehabilitation 
of various services and public relief measures are the aftermath of the floods. The huge 
losses sustained from floods throughout the world in general and India in particular have 
stimulated actions to deal with flood disaster on priority basis, especially where major 
urban development has taken place in river flood plain. 
   Structural measures like construction of abetment dams, channels diversion channels, 
cut-offs and longitudinal dykes, storage reservoirs and detention basins, can be adopted 
for flood control. But huge money is incurred on the construction of these structures 
which push a step back the nation due to limited resources. In case of structural 
measures, people become more dependent on government. The eventual failure during 
extreme event disillusions the people who thought themselves fully protected. It has been 
127 
 
experienced that condition deteriorates further when people loose confidence over local 
affaires which results in loss in management disciplines which may lead to anarchy. In 
such circumstances, non structural measures have gained immense significance.  
 
3. Measures to Control Flood Disaster 
    
Various measures for planning of better flood control are proposed: 
 
3.1 Watershed management and flood moderation 
 
Whenever devastating floods occur, the most important cause is the vanishing forest cover. In 
fact a well-managed forest cover produces profound influences on watershed hydrology. The 
high rain absorbing capacity of forest soil contributes most in minimizing the overland flow. A 
good forest cover protects the ground from soil erosion and thereby reduces the rate of sediment 
discharge. Above all a well-managed watershed provides year round stable flow in the streams. 
Moreover, there are other benefits concerning environmental and ecological aspects, which flow 
from forest wealth. In spite of all these benefits the forestland continues to be the most exploited 
resource for meeting the energy needs of the growing population and development programmes. 
 
3.2  Role of Small Reservoirs. 
 
The location of small reservoirs, on an average, produces flood reduction of about 35% on the 
head of the water tributaries, which drains areas from 60 to 125 Sq.miles. The US Department of 
agriculture took small watershed programmer for flood protection. In one case the programmer 
involved construction of 25 small flood detention reservoirs on upstream tributaries in a 622 
Sq.Km watershed of the Washita River, Oklahoma (USA).On completion, these structures 
effected reduction in the flood peak of a major flood by 50%.The result shows the usefulness of 
land treatment methods in moderating floods and reducing sediment discharge from the 
watershed. Reservoirs are time honored long term measure for flood moderation. However 
adequate data are not available on stream flow and silt discharge, as influenced by soil 
conservation and watershed management treatment for tropical monsoon conditions. Studies 
therefore, should be undertaken in the representative watershed.  
   All possible soil conservation measures in the watershed area be adopted so that the reservoir 
may not be filled up with silts and their life be reduced. There are six major factors, which 
contribute to high rate of runoff and sediment discharge from the upper catchments. These are : 
(i) Shifting Cultivation, (ii) Overgrazing, (iii) people’s right and prviligages, (iv) forest fires, (v) 
surface mining and (vi) landslides. 
 
3.3  Shifting cultivation  
 
The practice of shifting cultivation is prevalent on the mountainous upper catchments by the 
tribal people. The practice is “Slash and burn” and called in the northeastern region “Jhum” and 
“Podu” in Orissa and Andhra Pradesh. It is estimated that the mountainous catchments are under 
shifting cultivation in the northeastern region and the area affected by this practice is millions of 
hectare. It is a wasteful method of cultivation .With the increase in population, the cycling of 
occupying new lands through slash and burn gets smaller and smaller in the number of years and 
128 
 
the land gets exposed to erosion. In due course of time the entire mountainous catchments area 
may become barren. The answer lies in Citrus economy. Citrus orchard should be developed 
along with marketing and processing facilities. The ICAR has found that the high density of 
planting of pineapples on 30% slope would be profitable, while minimizing sediment discharge 
and runoff from the hill slopes. In the top one-third of the slopes, mulberry and oak plantations 
for sericulture shall also boost up tribal economy. 
 
3.4  Overgrazing 
 
Overgrazing degrades the watershed and leaves the ground bare and exposes it to erosion. Tribal 
people have their own rights to grazing, but ways and means should be though out to protect the 
rights of the tribal people and at the same time save the land from degradation. 
 
3.5  Land slides 
 
The mountainous upper catchments experience landslides which contributes substantial amount 
of silt to stream flow. The Himalayan region experience serious landslides. No systematic and 
reliable data are available on the extent of the problem. However the Border Road Research 
Institute has provided some data about land slide debris annually cleared by the Border Road 
Organization in the Himalayan region. In the western Himalayan region in 1977-1978, the 
quantity of landslide debris cleared was over 72 thousand cubic meters. In central Himalayan 
region it was over 45 cubic thousand meters. While in the eastern region it was over 58 thousand 
cubic meters. The highway, which passes through Siwaliks, Clay shale’s, is rated as highly prone 
to landslides. The menace of landslide has not spared even the coastal area of Peninsular India. 
On the western Coast a fast railway runs called Konkan Railway. In May 2003 there was a heavy 
shower and landslide occurred resulting in boulder falling on the track, three bogies were derailed 
resulting in loss to life and property. 
   The following measures should immediately be taken to prevent landslides 
a) Overgrazing be stopped with immediate effect. 
b) Loose debris of landslide should be stabilized as far as possible. 
c) Suitable arrangement should be made to monitor the landslides menace and the 
contribution to the silt in the stream flow of the rivers.     
   Catchment management in terms of flood zoning is the straightforward and most efficient flood 
protection method. It consists in delineating the potentially flooded area in case of a large flood, 
and in controlling human development in those areas. New constructions are forbidden in these 
areas and restrictions are applied to existing structures.  
 
3.6 Policy Objectives 
 
I. Prevention of flood is a complex issue because in India, rainfall is largely concentrated in the 
rainy season and quite often in a few spells of heavy rain as a result the runoff cannot be 
contained within the river channel and overflows on the flood plain. 
II. The situation is further complicated by the heavy silt load in the rivers especially those 
debouching on to the plains from the high steep Himalayan regions. Deforestation is a 
contributory factor.   
   The solutions to fight the floods are 
129 
 
a) Soil conservation and afforestation. 
b) Reservoirs 
c) Embankments 
d) Dredging of drainage channels 
e) Flood forecasting and warning 
 
 (i)  Deforestation should be completely banned in the watershed area in order to conserve soil 
and prevent the heavy silt load in the rivers. 
      (ii)  Reservoirs should be constructed as multipurpose reservoirs with flood moderation as one of 
the functions. 
      (iii) Underground Water Storage: A large proportion of rainfall infiltrates into the ground and 
maintains soil moisture and groundwater. 
   Measures should be adopted to increase groundwater, as it is conductive to, reduce the flood 
runoff. This may be in the form of land management for water conservation, and water-
harvesting structures. The additional water thus conserved in the ground water reservoirs can be 
drawn upon for irrigation in dry periods. 
 
3.7 Safe disposal of runoff 
 
In times of high flood the volume of water is so large that the surplus runoff finds its way to the 
sea through rivers and the capacity of the rivers is limited and water does overflow the banks. So 
measures like embankment, Channel improvement, inter basin transfers would become necessary. 
 
4.  New Thinking on Flood Control and Drought Management 
 
Suggestion for a national water grid, envisaging interlinking of Himalayan Rivers with the 
peninsular rivers, so that the surplus water in some regions may be diverted to deficit areas has 
been made. A total of 30 water transfer links, 16 under peninsular components and 14 under 
Himalyan components have been identified by the national water development agency for 
preparation of feasibility report. 
     Himalyan river development components envisages, construction of storage reservoirs on the 
principal tributaries of the river Ganga and Brahamputra in India, Nepal and Bhutan along with 
the interlinking canal system to transfer surplus water on the eastern tributaries of the Ganga to 
the west, apart from the linking of the main Brahamputra and the tributaries with the Ganga and 
the Ganga with the Mahanadi. 
     Therefore, floods would continue to occur partly due to human interference on flood plains 
and partly due to nature’s vagaries.  Total flood protection is unrealistic and probably unwise. 
However, flood plain management schemes which minimize the damage and reduce the threat to 
the human life and welfare are indispensable. Deforestation and resulting erosion and deposition 
of sediments in rivers is a major factor contributing to floods. 
     Structural measures like construction of abetment dams, channels diversion channels, 
cut-offs and longitudinal dykes, storage reservoirs and detention basins, can be adopted 
for flood control. But huge money is incurred on the construction of these structures 
which push a step back the nation due to limited resources. In case of structural 
measures, people become more dependent on government. The eventual failure during 
extreme event disillusions the people who thought themselves fully protected. It has been 
130 
 
experienced that condition deteriorates further when people loose confidence over local 
affaires which results in loss in management disciplines which may lead to anarchy. In 
such circumstances, non-structural measures have gained immense significance 
     Owing to economical constraints, structural measures are not much viable. Therefore, non-
structural flood control measures have found vital recognition to resolve the flood problem. 
Afforestation and other soil conservation measures to control erosion of soil, effective watershed 
management, diversion of flood water into the drought affected areas and spreading of flood 
water in thin layer over dry desert lands, warning systems, flood zoning, public education in 
flood mitigation and flood preparedness, efficient coordination of control gates operation at series 
of hydraulic structures in a river system, community centre establishment and stringent laws 
enforcement for flood mitigation and confidence building measures in people of affected areas 
are non structural flood control measures which can be adopted for flood control. Effective flood 
control, however, requires a judicious combination of structural and non-structural measures. 
     Furthermore, as the flood takes away what the people have or earned, non structural strategies 
should build confidence and sense of security in the people. Officials and residents should earn 
each other’s trust which implies that local responsible people must be found and given 
management authority during floods. Price gouging should be controlled to faster the economic 
growth. Following are various non structural measures to minimize impassible damage from 
floods. 
     Afforestation of watershed be adopted to prevent the soil erosion from the surface of 
watershed and to increase the resistance to flow of water on the watershed surface 
    Expedite and accurate timely transmission of advance warnings and instructions is very 
important to save the people from disaster and avoids confusion, panic and chaos. The 
expenditure incurred on such warning systems is a small fraction what is actually spent on flood 
relief. 
     Flood water is distributed thinly over areas such as paddy fields and desert dry lands 
where a part of water is lost due to evaporation and quite a proportion infiltrates into the sub-
soil. 
     In storage reservoir method an area is deliberately flooded with water in order to 
protect another area. In order to optimize the efficiency of the system, the reservoir needs 
to be as close as possible to the area to be protected. The storage reservoirs replenish the 
ground water table which in turn is used as a natural reservoir for drinking water supply. 
     Flood stages forecasts by expert hydrologists should be displayed on the posts at public places 
showing past major flood levels and the proposed flood proof level. By reading flood levels at 
theses postspeople can quickly compare a forecast with previous flood levels they remember and 
the levels of their properties 
     Expedite and accurate timely transmission of advance warnings and instructions is very 
important to save the people from disaster and avoids confusion, panic and chaos. The 
expenditure incurred on such warning systems is a small fraction what is actually spent on flood 
relief. 
     Raised community centres not liable to floods with adequate food, water, sanitation, 
medicines, shelters and health services should be established. The people should participate 
personally in their flood protection and become self reliant. They should also be motivated to 
flood proof their property by adopting the flood proof technology provided by the engineers. 
131 
 
     Since non structural measures only succeed through widespread public adoption, special effort 
is needed to overcome negative attitude particularly attention should be paid towards 
disseminating the risk information 
     People should be prevented from encroaching the drains. At some places in India 
people have constructed their establishment over the drains and municipalities have to 
strive hard to clear them. To stop this tendency very stern law should be enacted. 
1. safe place for preservation of personal, family and work related assets should be managed 
so that after the flood, people can resume their normal lives. 
2. employment should be provided to the people who lose their normal jobs in flood 
fighting. 
3. essential service like water supply, gas, post and telegraph, health, education, police, 
roads, electricity and medicines should not be disrupted during floods. 
4. temporary shelters, evacuation means, security patrols should be enforced to conciliate 
the flood grief ridden people. 
   It can be concluded that floods would continue to occur partly due to human interference on 
flood plains and partly due to nature’s vagaries. 
     Urban floods usually result either from high rainfall in watershed or from local storms. The 
flood resulting from local storms can combated with structures such as sewer network, ditches, 
pumping stations, canals and reservoirs to predetermined risk levels. Owing to economical 
constraints. Structural measures are not much viable. Therefore, non-structural flood control 
measures have found vital recognition to resolve the flood problem. Afforestation and other soil 
conservation measures to control erosion of soil, effective watershed management, diversion of 
flood water into the drought affected areas and spreading of flood water in thin layer over dry 
desert lands, warning systems, flood zoning, public education in flood mitigation and flood 
preparedness, efficient coordination of control gates operation at series of hydraulic structures in 
a river system, community centre establishment and stringent laws enforcement for flood 
mitigation and confidence building measures in people of affected areas are non structural flood 
control measures which can be adopted for flood control. Effective flood control, however, 
requires a judicious combination of structural and non-structural measures.Total flood protection 
is unrealistic and probably unwise. However, flood plain management schemes which minimize 
the damage and reduce the threat to the human life and welfare are indispensable.  
 
5.  Non Structural Flood Control Measures 
 
Flood water can be distributes thinly over areas such as paddy fields and desert dry lands 
where a part of water is lost due to evaporation and quite a proportion infiltrates into the 
sub soil. 
     The storage reservoir should be maintained empty for the entire period of flood season 
so that only flood water is stored in it. The natural depressions on the surface of flood 
plain should not be used for waste water disposal. The occupants of the flood prone area 
should be educated to realize the importune of large natural depressions in flood control. 
Before the monsoon these natural reservoirs should be kept empty. Ponds in flood prone 
area may be dug by the people themselves for storage of flood water for shorter duration. 
The stored water in these ponds recharge the under ground water basins which in turn 
raise the water table of the ar 
 
132 
 
6.  Deforestation   
 
Deforestation in the upper region exposes the land to soil erosion. The top fertile layer of 
land gets washed away and deposited in the river beds. The land turns into gullies and the 
river becomes shallow and river flow capacity decreases due to deposition of silt. Then 
rivers are easily prone to floods. In spite of stringent laws, the cutting of forests goes on 
surreptitiously in collusion with contractors. 
   Deforestation of water shed be adopted to prevent the soil erosion from the surface of 
watershed and to increase the resistance to flow of water on the watershed surface. 
 
7.  Distribution of Local Flood Information 
 
Flood stages forecasts by expert hydrologists should be displayed on the posts at public places 
showing past major flood levels and the proposed flood proof level. By reading flood levels at 
theses postspeople can quickly compare a forecast with previous flood levels they remember and 
the levels of their properties.Substantial effort should be made by authorities to reduce damage by 
providing flood proof and flood preparedness systems and by advising the people how to respond 
to risk assessment and hysrologic warnings. 
 
8.  Establishment of Hydrologic and Flood Warning Systems 
 
Forecast of expected flood level by hydrologic system helps in controlling the gates regulation on 
various hydraulic structures in the river system. Expedite and accurate timely transmission of 
advance warnings and instructions is very important to save the people from disaster and avoids 
confusion, panic and chaos. The expenditure incurred on such warning systems is a small fraction 
what is actually spent on flood relief. Wireless communication systems should be installed 
because telephone systems  may fail during floods. T.V/ and Radio announcements and public 
address systems on vans and jeeps may be used to instruct the people. Establishment of control 
rooms in flood affected area is of extreme importance. an efficient flood forecasting system may 
helps in timely rescue and relief operations, evacuation of people to safer places, posting of 
medical teams, arrangement of medicines, clothing etc for affected people and thus restricting the 
number of casualties and loss of properties. Once the people are properly informed, they select 
the most appropriate solution themselves and willingly collaborate with the local authorities to 
implement the flood protection programme. 
 
In a river basin a central control room station equipped with such a sophisticated flood warning 
system may be connected to different substations located at different hydraulic structures on that 
river system provided with modern internet facility so that the data and necessary instructions can 
be passed on to control the flow, volume of water, gate position at the substation along the river. 
The flood data from meteorological , hydrological departments and substations may be 
transmitted to the control station where the transmitted data may ve processed using a software 
developed for the purpose and  then necessary instructions may be transmitted to the substations 
to take necessary action like regulation of gates of hydraulic structures along the river system. In 
this way high flood surge waves can be flattened as far upstream as possible and the flood water 
can be passed smoothly safely to the sea. 
 
133 
 
9.  Establishment of Raised Community Centres 
 
Raised community centers not liable to floods with adequate food, water, sanitation, medicines, 
shelters and health services should be established. During non-flooded days, these community 
centers can be utilized for markets, hospitals, gardens, police barracks, marriage and other 
function place, fetes and exhibitions. 
 
10.  Confidence Building Measures 
 
Since non structural measures only succeed through widespread public adoption, special effort is 
needed to overcome negative attitude particularly attention should be paid towards disseminating 
the risk information. 
     The flood control measures should be compatible with the local needs and the wishes of the 
flood plain residents. Encompassing all gains in health and nutrition, secured assets, continuance 
of communication, transport, emergency, services and holding social, cultural, environmental 
values alleviate the people from flood disruptions. 
     Larger floods cause farmers to sell land or borrow money to survive and then leave the family 
destitute. Therefore, the farmers at the margin should be helped by land improvement to yield 
more products so that they are not forced to sell their products at low price panicky. 
     In short, flood takes away what the people have or earned. Non structural strategies should 
build confidence and sense of security in the people. Officials and residents should earn each 
other’s trust which implies that local responsible people must be found and given management 
authority during floods. Price gouging should be controlled to faster the economic growth.  
     Safe places for preservation of personal, family and work related assets should be managed so 
that  after the flood, people can resume their normal lives. Employment should be provided to the 
people who lose their normal jobs in flood fighting. Essential service like water supply, gas, post 
and telegraph, health, education, police, roads, electricity and medicines should not be disrupted 
during floods. Temporary shelters, evacuation means, security patrols should be enforced to 
conciliate the flood grief ridden people. 
 
   11.  People’s Coordination in Flood Preparedness  
 
People should be educated to prepare themselves in response to flood warning by organizing and 
facilitating effective fighting to prevent flood damage, timely rescue and relief operations and 
rehabilitation of the affected people as a last resort. They should also be motivated to flood proof 
their property by adopting the flood proof technology provided by the engineers. 
 
  12.  Stringent Regulation Act And Its Implementation 
 
Flood protection regulation act must be prepared at the centre and states must be forced 
to follow them. In urban areas regulation should be used to eliminate unsafe occupancy 
of flood prone areas. Some way must be found to prevent the dumping of garbage in the 
waterways. People should be prevented from encroaching the drains. At some places in 
India people have constructed  their establishment  over the drains and municipalities 
have to strive hard to clear them. To stop this tendency very stern law should be enacted. 
 
134 
 
13.  Drainage Facilities   
 
Efficient drainage system should be maintained in urban areas to avoid stay of flood water. The 
drainage facilities may be clogged due to sediment and man made activities like dumping of 
garbage, damming up of drainage channels due to unauthorized encroachment. Due to inadequate 
operation and maintenance theses drainages may be utterly in bad condition. Therefore, these 
drainage facilities should be properly cleared before monsoon for safe passage of flood water. 
 
14.  Flood Zoning 
 
Areas liable to floods should be demarcated on large scale maps and displayed at public places. 
Table 3 shows flood zoning details. 
 
Table 3 Flood zoning 
 
Frequency 
of flood 
In years 
Land use 
10 Parks. Plat grounds, are allowed and private or public buildings are not allowed 
25 Residential buildings with stipulations like plinth levels, ondustries, commercial 
buildings and public utilities and basement  
100 Industries, public utilities like hospitals, electricity, water supply installations or 
telephone exchanges, railway stations, defense installations, commercial centres 
subject to the condition that they are at 100 years flood levels, are allowed. 
 
Conclusions  
 
 Authors have arrived on the following conclusions. 
 
Judicious combination of less expensive structural measures and non-structural measures is 
proposed to control floods effectively. Detention basins should be constructed and the flood 
water should be stored in the basins temporarily and then the stored water can be discharged 
gradually to the sea. The detention basins recharge the underground water storage basins which 
provide adequate water quantity during dry season. 
     Afforestation should be strictly implemented so that the rivers may not become shallow due to 
deposition of eroded soil particles and the flood water is contained in the river section itself. 
Grass covered watersheds are not subjected to erosion and relatively low peak flood surge waves 
result due to the grass and plants resistance to flow.The flood water may be diverted into the 
desert dry land where bulk of water infiltrates and some of it evaporates. Large size natural 
depressions should be kept empty before commencement of monsoon season so that some flood 
water may be accommodated in these depressions. Land management upstream to increase 
infiltration, interception and detention delay and reduce the rate and volume of run off. 
     To control epidemic longer stay of water in urban areas can be prevented by providing 
efficient drainage system.Efficient Hydrological, Meteorological and warning systems should be 
provided at various stations in river basin for passing timely transmission of flood information 
and instructions to the people to move to the safer places. 
135 
 
 
Stringent regulation act should be imposed and implemented religiously to control forest cutting, 
flood plain encroachment, clogging of drainage facilities to safeguard the urban areas from the 
flood. Well coordinated operation of gates at various hydraulic structures is proposed to release 
gradually the flood water to avoid transmission of high surge waves downstream. 
     People should be safeguarded against corruption, harassment, theft, threat, vandalism, robbery 
and other insults. They should be provided essential services such as electricity, water supply, 
milk, food, clothing, fuel, medical aids and honest administration for their security. Price hike 
during floods should be strictly suppressed. NGOs and International community should provide 
financial as well as technological assistance to the flood prone areas. Flood fighting and flood 
preparedness is proposed to be a part of education policy of the country so that people themselves 
may adopt damage preventive measures. 
     River networking may be very useful as when some parts of the country face flood problem, 
the other parts face draught at the same time. Therefore, the surplus water from flooded rivers 
may be diverted into the channels flowing towards the draught areas and both areas are relived 
from their respective problems. 
     The capacity of the flood channel must be made large enough to prevent or limit over bank 
flooding so that the flow can be confined between high banks, by construction of flood banks, 
dykes or flood walls. Channel improvement by cutting, straightening or deepening and by river 
training works 
 
References 
 
Adnan, Shapan, Allison Barrett, S.M. Nurul Alam, and Angelika Brustinow, (1992). ‘People’s 
Participation: NGOS and the Flood Action Plan’: An International Review, Oxfam, Bangladesh, 
House 27, Road 6, Dhanmondi, Dhaka 1205, Bangladesh. 
Bharat Singh, (1988). ‘Agriculture and Irrigation’, National Seminar or New Perspections in   
Water Management, Indore. 
C.W.C.  Reports on  ‘Flood Situation in the Country During 1987  and  1988’. 
California Flood Management. “An Evaluation of Flood Damage Prevention                    
Programs”. Bulletin 199, State of California, Department of Water Resources,                           
Sacramento, Calif.(September, 1980).    
Gupta R.D., Mohd Jamil, Mubeen Beg, (1996). ‘Analysis of the Combining Flow Type    
Horizontal Trapezoidal Channel Junctions Under Subcritical FlowConditions’, Proceedings, 
RIVERTECH ’96, Ist International conference on New/Emerging concepts of civil Engg.              
For Rivers Flow, September 22 – 26, 1996, Chicago, U.S.A. 
Johnson, William K., (1978). ‘Physical and Economic Feasibility of Non-Structural Flood        
Plain Management Measures’, Hydrologic Engineering Centre, Corps of Engineers, 609, 2nd        
st, Davis CA 95616. U.S.A. 
Jha, M.N., (1995), Ground Water Characteristics of Muzaffarpur District, M.Sc.Engineering, 
(Civil) Thesis , B.R.A. Bihar University, Muzaffarpur, India. 
Leopold, Luna, (1990). ‘Ethos, Equity, and the Water Resources’, The 1990 Abel Wolman 
Distinguished Lecture, National Academy of Sciences, 2101 Constitution Ave., NW,       
Washington DC 20418, U.S.A. 
136 
 
Mohd. Jamil, Mubeen Beg, S.M.Mohsin, (1995). Proceedings of “Regional Seminar on     Low 
Cast Flood Resisting Energy Efficient Houses for Eastern Uttar Pradesh”, Gorakhpur,       U.P., 
India. 
U.S. National Science Foundations, (1980). ‘A Report on Flood Hazard Mitigation’,      
Washington, D.C. 
Ward, R., (1978). ‘Economic Aspects of Response to the Flood Hazard’, A Geographical 
Perspective, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, N.Y. 
 
 
137 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
ENVIRONMENTAL HAZARDS DUE TO MARBLE SLURRY DISPOSAL, 
CHITRAKOOTNAGAR, UDAIPUR, RAJASTHAN, INDIA. 
                                                            
 
Dr Govind Singh Bhardwaj1 
 
 
ABSTRACT: There are around 4000 marble mines and about 1100 marble cutters in medium 
sector spread over the 16 districts of Rajasthan. There are 150 gangue saw and 300 polishing 
units in operation for marble stone processing, where the marble slurry is generated as a by-
product. The slurry waste is approximately in the range of 20% of the total marble handled. The 
amount of marble slurry generated in Rajasthan every year is very substantial being in the range 
of 5-6 million tones. The raw stone like granite, kotah stone, green-pink-white marble, sandstone 
are the major category of dimensional stones processed by the cutting industries. The slurry 
generated during cutting is mainly of white marble and hence called as marble slurry but truly 
speaking it is a mixture of slurry produced from different types of dimensional stones cutting. 
Even the wear and tear component of cutting tools also added to the slurry. Thus it is becomes a 
typical slurry material. The physical, chemical and other characteristics of slurry material are its 
own and several researches conducted for its utilization, still could not arrive to suitable use. At 
the same time day to day requirements of dimensional stone for the purpose of construction of 
temples, buildings, multistoried buildings etc. has increased manifold, which in turn resulted in 
the slurry generation. The quantity of generated slurry is huge and problem of dumping place 
arises. Various agencies involved in the slurry dump yard site selection.  Due to lacking strict 
vigilance the marble cutting industries people are dumping the marble slurry in nearby pit or 
vacant spaces at less distant place from their industrial units, although notified areas have been 
marked for dumping. This leads to serious environmental hazards. This also contaminates the 
underground water resources. 
 
Keywords: Marble slurry, Environmental hazards  
  
1.  Introduction: 
 
Rajasthan is famous for its marble deposits. There are around 4000 marble mines and about 1100 
marble cutters in medium sector spread over the 16 districts of Rajasthan (Fig 1). Marble slurry is 
generated as a by-product during cutting of marble. The waste is approximately in the range of 
20% of the total marble handled. The amount of marble slurry generated in Rajasthan every year 
is very substantial being in the range of 5-6 million tones. The marble cutting industries are 
                                                        
1 Department of Mining Engineering, College of Technology and Engineering, Maharana Pratap University 
of Agriculture and Technology, Udaipur-313001, INDIA, bhardwaj_gs@rediffmail.com  
 
138 
 
dumping the marble slurry in any nearby pit or vacant spaces, near their unit although notified 
areas have been marked for dumping. 
 
 
 
Figure 1 Showing mine waste dumps in mining area of Rajsamand, Rajasthan (Modified after    
http://infochangeindia.org/environment/features/mountains-of-marble-waste.html2011) 
 
 
This leads to serious environmental and dust pollution and occupation of vast area of land 
especially after the slurry dries up. This also contaminates the underground water reserves 
(http://www.ucciudaipur.com/raj_marble.htm,).  
 
1.1 Slurry-generation  
 
when marble blocks are cut by gang saws, water is used as a coolant. The blade thickness of the 
saws is about 5 mm and normally the blocks are cut in 20mm thick sheets. Therefore, out of 
every 25mm thickness of marble block, 5mm are converted into powder while cutting. This 
powder flows along with the water as marble slurry. Thus, it is nearly 20 % of the total weight of 
the marble processed results into marble slurry (Fig.2). The marble slurry has nearly 35%-45% 
water content. The total waste generation from mining to finished product is about 50 % of 
mineral mined (http://www.ucciudaipur.com/raj_marble.htm). Chemical composition of marble 
slurry in nutshell brief is given in table 1. Present study deals with the slurry generated at Sukher 
Industrial Area  where 80  marble gangue saw and 150 polishing units are in operation. 
 
 
Table: 1 Chemical composition of marble slurry 
 
S. No. Particular Analyzed 
Value in % 
1 Loss on ignition 43.46 
2 Silica 1.69 
3 Alumina 1.04 
4 Iron oxide 0.21 
5 Lime 49.07 
6 Magnesia 4.46 
7 Soda Less than 0.01 
8 Potash Less than 0.01 
 
 
 
139 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2 Slurry generation at various stage rawblock, block under cutting and polishing 
 
 
1.2   Environmental impacts of marble slurry deposition 
 
The marble slurry samples are collected all along periphery of the slurry dump at 10 meters 
interval.  On the basis of physical properties of collected samples, 10 samples are selected for the 
preparation of thin sections. The granulo-metric analysis results shows that the slurry contains   
40% particles< 75µm and 30% particles< 25µm, this causes serious environmental problems. 
When marble slurry dries, fine particles get entrained in atmosphere and it reduces visibility and 
creates respiratory problems. In rainy seasons road surface becomes slippery, which is dangerous 
for the traffic. Due to long term deposition on land, finer particle block the flow regime of the 
aquifers, which affects the underground water availability.  Also contaminates the surface and 
underground water reserves. It creates necrotic ecological conditions for flora and fauna. In dry 
season, marble powder flies and deposits on vegetation and crop. It affects environmental and local 
eco system (Bear, J. et al. 1987). 
 
Marble powder deposited in all small natural water streams and finally Ahar Riverbed and 
surroundings reduces porosity and permeability of soil results underground water channel 
blockage. Fine particles result in poor fertility of soil due to increase in alkalinity. 
 
2.   Seriousness of the Issue     
  
The aquifer in this area is under saturated type where the atmospheric pressure is >> than 
pressure head of water. The water table in this area is average 60 meters and both GW & ATM 
pressure are equal at this depth. In rainy season this pressure stratum changes rising and the slurry 
migration and transport along water conduits/ channels become variable sometimes triggering 
effect. Aquifer nature is unconfined and anisotropic type. Eventually hydraulic conductivity (K) 
is variable & mostly horizontal (Kh) and vertical (Kv). In some portions it may be classified as 
semi-confined aquifers with one or more aquitards work as an anisotropic system, even when the 
separate layers are isotropic, because the compound Kh and Kv values are different. The 
hydraulic conductivity (K) is commonly defined in various units as given in table 2. The proper 
calculation of flow of slurry contaminants to drains  or flow to an aquifer, the anisotropy is to be 
taken into account.  Rock units of variable porosity are also highly fractured, has an appreciable 
hydraulic conductivity to facilitate movement of water (Pinder et al 1968; Wang et al 1982; 
McDonald, et al 1988; Kashyap, D. 1989 and  Franke, et al 1991).  The indicative hydraulic 
conductivities of some rocks types are given in table 2. Aquifers are critically important in human 
habitation like Chitrakootnagar, which provides sustainable fresh groundwater to urban areas. 
The initial studies by the pump test at ten locations in Chitrakootnagar area i.e. domestic bore 
140 
 
well has been carried out shows the hydraulic conductivity varies from fast to extremely slow 
(Table2, 3).  
 
Table 2: Commonly used units for hydraulic conductivity (K) 
     --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 
Description Meters/day  (m/d) 
Meters/second 
 (m/s) 
Millimeters/day 
 (mm/d) 
Millimeters/hour 
(mm/hr) 
Extremely slow 0.000001 1.5741x10-11 0.001 0.000041667 
Very Slow 0.0001 1.5741x10-9 0.1 0.0041667 
Slow 0.01 1.5741x10-7 10 0.41667 
Moderate 1 1.5741x10-5 1000 41.667 
Fast 10 1.5741x10-4 10000 416.667 
Very Fast 100 1.5741x10-3 100000 4166.667 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
---- 
Aquifers just below the ground and underground vicinity of the waste disposal dam in the area belong to 
semi-arid zones where contents of the waste disposed up percolating down into the underground. This is 
supplemented by pumping from the bore wells in the area. Finally risk is increasing day by day.  Slurry 
contains water and normally contains various elements as shown in table 1. With the span of time these 
foreign items are added to the underground and it is a continuous process, causing environmental 
problems, this cannot be seen by naked eyes.  One more serious works which is under progress i.e. 
covering the slurry waste with soil and development of the park. The buried slurry will be permanent 
source of foreign material to spread in the underground aquifers through percolation of rain water from 
the covered soil and through and through the buried waste. Damaging entire underground water regime, 
cause an environmental problem.  Relationship between Waste dump site and Gradient of the landscape 
of Chitrakootnagar as well as half of the expanding Udaipur city and increasing population density may 
be more serious in near future. The site is really selected in such a way that nobody can see behind the 
hill but it is just like hiding the disease (Kinzelbachet et al  1986; Kumar 1992 & 2001; Nelson et al. 
2009; www.angelfire.com/nh/cpkumar/hydrology.html ). 
     
Table 3: Indicative hydraulic conductivities of some rock types (Brassington, 1988) 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Rock Type Grain size (mm) Hydraulic Conductivity K (m/d)  
 
Clay 
 
0.0005-0.002 
 
10-8-10-2 
Silt 0.002-0.06 10-2 - 1 
Fine Sand 0.06 -0.25 1-5 
Medium Sand 0.25-0.50 5-20 
Coarse Sand 0.50-2 20-100 
Gravel 2-64 100-1000 
   
141 
 
Shale small 5x10-8 - 5x10-6 
Sandstone medium 10-3-1 
Limestone variable 10-5-1 
   
Basalt small 0.0003-3 
Granite large 0.0003-0.03 
Slate small 10-8-10-5 
Schist medium 10-7-10-4 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 
2.1 Relationship between groundwater and surface water  
 
Although surface water and groundwater appear to be two distinct sources of water, they are not. 
Surface water and groundwater are basically one singular source of water connected physically in 
the hydrologic cycle.  If groundwater levels are above water levels in adjacent streams, the 
groundwater system will discharge water to the stream and increase flow in the stream (Fig 3). 
When groundwater levels are lower, however, water will leave the stream to recharge the 
groundwater and decrease flow in the stream. When groundwater discharges into an adjacent 
stream, it is called a gaining stream and when stream water recharges surrounding groundwater, it 
is called a losing stream. Knowledge of this groundwater-surface water interaction reveals that 
changes in either the surface water or groundwater system will affect the other. Effective 
management requires consideration of both water sources as one resource. With that in mind, 
more understanding and protection of groundwater, especially from contamination and overuse, 
is needed to increase the overall water supply. Monitoring and evaluation must be continued to 
gain the understanding needed so that future groundwater issues are not overlooked or 
misunderstood (Anderson, et al 1992, ASTM 1993&1995). 
 
 
 
       Figure 3 The Chitrakootnagar area belongs to losing stream, (after USGS Circular 1139, 
1998). 
 
3.  Materials and Methodology 
 
The marble slurry affected area has been studied with the help of Google earth satellite map 
(www.Googleearth. maps).  Free down load software has been downloaded and different modes 
of mapping have been explored and finally 3D map found suitable. The slurry dump yard site is 
shown at different scales in figure 2. The slurry dump site terrain showing slurry occupied area in 
between the elevation lines of 700 m and 650 meters. Surrounding hillocks maximum elevation is 
nearly 900 meters. Total surface area of 10 square kilometer is calculated as watershed from 
which complete rain water drained in to the slurry occupied dump yard valley (Fig.4, 5).  
142 
 
 
  
 
Figure 4 Satellite Google earth map showing 
location of marble slurry dump sit 
 
Figure 5 Terrain map of the marble slurry 
dump site and its surroundings 
 
 
 
The areal spreading of the slurry area has been calculated with the help of obtaining coordinates 
at tail end, dam site downstream end and length is calculated as more than 1.0 km. The width is 
calculated as more than 250 meters, by the coordinates of western side and eastern side of the 
slurry filled area (Fig. 6). 
 
The severely affected area is urban improvement trust area, developed as residential colony of 
Chitrakootnagar and sports complex of national importance. The area is in the downstream 
direction, where groundwater contamination has been reported as slurry content, as fine particles 
of slurry in bore wells drilled for the supply of domestic water. The polluted area is finally 
connected with the surface water bodies of Roopsagar Lake, Ayad River and finally Udaisagar 
(Fig 7).  
 
143 
 
 
   
Figure 6 Measurements of coordinate’s distances of marble slurry dump area 
 
Field photographs are evident of huge quantity of slurry and its spread. For future years to come 
with day by day severity of contamination, because water is part of slurry and rain water is added 
to this. The affected area and specially the dump site is losing stream type, which creates more 
problem for percolating the slurry particles in to the ground water aquifer (Fig. 8). 
 
144 
 
 
 
Figure 7 Showing slurry generation source area, sports complex and surface water bodies. 
        
 
 
Figure 8   Field photographs showing marble slurry dump site of Chitrakootnagar. 
 
145 
 
Marble slurry occupied areas geographical coordinates are 24° 35' 0" North, 73° 41' 0".The study 
includes mapping of the vicinity area, sampling of the slurry all along the periphery, sampling of 
the tube well water in the radius of slurry pond: downstream, Google earth map of slurry dam, 
modeling of slurry spreading, water contamination, affected area map and details, Structural 
geological map of slurry disposal area, slurry behavior during the rain precipitation, slurry and 
local weather/slurry and seasons, geotechnical aspect of the site and data analysis. 
   Latitude/Longitude Distance Calculation is carried out with the help of PERL powered software 
(http://jan.ucc.nau.edu/~cvm/latlongdist.html).  This query will determine the distance between 
two points on the earth given their latitudes and longitudes.  
 
Valid input formats used is mentioned as under:  
Source 
Latitude: 24.620647 N Longitude: 73.736715 W  
Destination 
Latitude: 
24.621505 N
Longitude: 
73.734346 W
 
Units for results 
km Send Query Clear Query
 
 
Distance calculation results:  
Distance between 24.620647N 73.736715W and 24.621505N 73.734346W is 0.2581 km. This 
calculation assumes the earth is a perfect sphere with a radius of 6378.0 km.  
 
Distances between two geographical points in the slurry a hazard affected area is calculated with 
the help of Google freeware measured coordinates.  
 
4.  Results and Discussion 
 
Slurry dumped in the valley portion comprises of clastic sedimentary rocks, bounded by the 
siliceous rocks i.e. quartzite’s, siliceous phyllites and conglomerates, trending NE-SW & highly 
deformed. The monsoon rain born surface water flows i.e. there are fifteen seasonal water 
streams or nala are adding water to the slurry disposed area. The present status of slurry dumped 
in the area is estimated > 1, 05, 60000 tones. The bright white portion in the satellite imagery is 
clearly interpreted as spread of the slurry disposed area i.e. severe effected, which is nearly 2.0 
square km. The area under slurry born environmental hazards is calculated as more than 20 
square kilometers, which is visible as slight white shadow zone. The tail end of the slurry area 
and shape of the slurry occupied area spreading is shown in the figure 8.  
     The hydraulic conductivity results shows anisotropic nature of the subsurface rock strata and 
fast conductivity conduits are facilitating the spread of the slurry particles from the dump site to 
the entire area. The groundwater of the tube well drilled in the downstream area i.e. 
Chitrakootnagar / Khelgaon is found contaminated with slurry particles.  
 
146 
 
 
 
Figure 7 Satellite images of the slurry occupied area. 
 
There is a noticeable decrease in the discharge of tube wells in the area, interpreted as blockage 
of the underground water channels, may be a serious threat in near future. People residing in the 
area are exposed to the slurry particles floating in the air and it may cause serious respiratory 
disease silicosis, although till date no case has been reported.  The slurry is being dumped 
continuously by the processing industries from nearby Sukher Industrial area. A serious thought 
should be given for preventing from future hazards. The maximum quantity of the radiation 
directly reflected to the atmosphere from whatever solar radiation falling over the earth surface in 
the area, is being treated as responsible for unseen changes in the local weather conditions.  
 
       5.  Conclusions 
 
Marble disposal pond length is more than 1000meters, average width 250 m, average depth 10 
meter, 
Location is uphill and it is a threat to the downstream area i.e. Chitrakootnagar. Area is losing 
stream type, especially slurry pond. This area is identified as unconfined, under saturated and 
anisotropic aquifer. This could be strong reason of slurry particle flow in suspension. Hydro- 
geological environmental setting of the area is under serious threat, in 100% area slurry particle 
reaches, as evident by domestic tube well yield ( SP-suspended particle value appears abnormal , 
TDS value slightly appears abnormal, electrical conductance , pH disturbed. It is estimated that 
the 25 km2 area became prone to slurry mixed drinking water born diseases like, kidney stone etc 
and 50 km2 Is under environmental hazard threat. 
147 
 
 
Acknowledgements  
 
Thankful to Dr G.P.Saxena, IFS, for requesting me to carry out the study, in the interest of 
population residing in the area, which has suffered a lot by the slurry hazards. Thanks are due to 
Professor Narendra S. Rathore, Dean CTAE and Professor S. S. Chahal, Vice-Chancellor 
M.P.U.A.T., Udaipur for their support.  
 
References 
 
Anderson, M.P. and W.W. Woessner (1992) Applied Groundwater Modeling. Academic Press, 
Inc.,San Diego, C A., 381 p. 
American Society for Testing and Materials (1993) Standard Guide for Application of a Ground-
Water Flow Model to a Site-Specific Problem. ASTM Standard, D 5447-93, West Conshohocken, 
PA, 6 p. 
American Society for Testing and Materials (1995) Standard Guide for Subsurface Flow and 
Transport Modeling. ASTM Standard D 5880-95, West Conshohocken, PA, 6 p. 
Bear, J., and A. Verruijt (1987) Modeling Groundwater Flow and Pollution. D. Reidel Publishing 
Company, 414 p. 
Brassington R, (1988). Field Hydrogeology. Geological Society of London Handbook Series. 
Open University Press.  
Franke, O.L., Bennett, G.D., Reilly, T.E., Laney, R.L., Buxton, H.T., and Sun, R.J.( 1991) 
Concepts and Modeling in Ground-Water Hydrology -- A Self-Paced Training Course. U.S. 
Geological Survey Open-File Report 90-707. 
 
http://infochangeindia.org/environment/features/mountains-of-marble-waste.html2011 
 
http://jan.ucc.nau.edu/~cvm/latlongdist.html, PERL powered 1994, used on 21.12.2011 
 
http://www.ucciudaipur.com/raj_marble.htm, downloaded on 22.12.2011 
 
Kashyap, Deepak (1989) Mathematical Modelling for Groundwater Management – Status in 
India.  
Indo-French Seminar on Management of Water Resources, 22-24 September, 1989, Festival of 
France-1989, Jaipur, pp. IV-59 to IV-75. 
 
Kinzelbach, W. (1986) Groundwater Modeling: An Introduction with SamplePrograms in 
BASIC. Elsevier, New York, 333 p. 
 
Kumar, C. P. (1992) Groundwater Modelling – In. Hydrological Developments inIndia Since 
Independence. A Contribution to Hydrological Sciences, NationalInstitute of Hydrology, 
Roorkee, pp. 235-261. 
 
Kumar, C. P. (2001) Common Ground Water Modelling Errors and Remediation.ournal of Indian 
Water Resources Society, Volume 21, Number 4, October2001, pp. 149-156. 
 
McDonald, M.G. and A.W. Harbaugh (1988) A Modular Three-DimensionalFinite-Difference 
Ground-Water Flow Model, USGS TWRI Chapter 6-A1, 586 p. 
148 
 
 
Nelson L Lemeraow, Franklin J Agardy, Patric Sulivan, and Joseph A Salvato , Environmental 
Engineering (2009) Environmental Health and safety-For municipal infrastructure, Landuse & 
planning, and Industry), Sixth Edition, published by John Wiley & Sons, New Jursey, page 44 
 
Pinder, G.F., and J.D. Bredehoeft, (1968) Application of the Digital Computer forAquifer 
Evaluation, Water Resources Research, Vol. 4, pp. 1069-1093.13.  
 
Wang, H.F. and M.P. Anderson, (1982) Introduction to Groundwater Modeling.W.H. Freeman 
and Company, San Francisco, CA, 237 p. 
 
Website:Kumar Links to Hydrology 
Resources:http://www.angelfire.com/nh/cpkumar/hydrology.html 
Website - Scientific Software Group:http://www.scisoftware.com/ 
 
Website - USGS Ground-Water Software:http://water.usgs.gov/nrp/gwsoftware/ 
 
www.Googleearth.maps 
 
 
  
149 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
DATA CHANGE DETECTION WITH MULTI-TEMPORAL REMOTE SENSING 
 
 
Anup Kumar Karda1  and Dr. Govind Singh Bhadwaj2  
 
 
ABSTRACT: Remote Sensing (RS) means the process of analyzing the earth surface features 
and estimating its geo-bio-physical properties without having direct contact with the object. It 
uses electromagnetic radiation as a medium of interaction. Spectral, spatial, temporal and 
polarization signatures are major characteristics of the sensor, which facilitate target 
discrimination. Currently its becoming more and more important to monitor the changing 
information on the earth’s surface for the local, regional and global resources and environment. 
The large collection of past and present remote sensing imagery makes it possible to analyze 
spatio-temporal pattern of environmental elements and impact of human activities in past 
decades. Many reviews have assorted the detection approaches and classified change detection 
methods from its essence into seven groups, including direct comparison, classification, object-
oriented method, model method, time-series analysis, and visual analysis and hybrid methods. At 
the same time, in pre-processing, the effect and methods of geometric correction and radiometric 
correction is discussed, and in accuracy assessment, this paper summarize the present methods 
into exterior check and interior check and emphasis on that how to get the ground truth. The 
challenges that the change detection is currently facing and possible counter measures are also 
discussed. 
 
Keywords: Remote Sensing, geo-bio-physical, spatial, temporal, spatio-temporal, object-oriented, 
radiometric, ground truth. 
 
 
1.   Introduction 
 
A novel method of change detection for high-resolution remote sensing imagery. The method has 
three primary processes: image segmentation, image difference and change detection. There are 
enormous challenges on applying multi temporal imagery to derive timely information on the 
earth’s environment and human activities. Processing of multi-temporal images and change 
detection has been an active research fi eld in remote sensing for decades.  The  
wider availability of large archives of historical images also makes long-term change detection 
and modeling possible. 
 
                                                
1PG student, Department of Electronics & Communication, CTAE, MPUAT, Udaipur, India 
anupkumarkarda@gmail.com 
2Assistant Professor, Department of Mining Engineering, CTAE, MPUAT, Udaipur, 
IndiaBhardwaj_gs@rediffmail.com 
 
150 
 
Such a development stimulates further investigation in developing more advanced image 
processing methods and new approaches in handling image data in the time dimension. It has 
been generally agreed that change detection is a complicated and integrated process. No existing 
approach is optimal and applicable to all cases (Gong Jianya et al. 2008). Present paper deals 
with the steps of change detection, including re-processing, change detection methods and 
accuracy assessment.  
 
Data change detection viz. bi-temporal change detection and temporal trajectory analysis. Data 
change detection algorithms are based on bi-temporal change detection and little care for 
temporal trajectory analysis. Here we consider both of them. For bi-temporal images change 
detection any kind of detection algorithm can be attributed to one of the following three kinds of 
methods: directly compare different data sources, compare extracted information and detect 
changes by bringing all the data sources into a uniform model. Temporal trajectory analysis can 
be decomposed into bi temporal change detection and long time-serial analysis. Finally, this 
article classifies change detection methods from its essence into seven groups, including direct 
comparison, classification, object-oriented method, model method, time-series analysis, visual 
analysis and hybrid methods (COPPIN, P. et al.1996; Gong Jianya et al. 2008). 
 
 
2.  Image Pre-Processing  
 
Multitemporal radiometric corrections and image registration are important and indispensable 
steps in the process of image pre-processing. 
 
2.1  Multi-temporal radiometric correction 
 
There are various factors, which influences the radiometric corrections such as different imaging 
seasons or dates, different solar altitudes, different angles, different meteorological conditions 
and different cover areas of cloud, rain or snow etc. Radiometric correction is to remove or 
reduce the inconsistency between the values surveyed by sensors and the spectral reflectivity and 
spectral radiation brightness of the objects, which encompasses absolute radiometric correction 
and relative radiometric correction. Absolute radiometric correction mainly rectifies the radiation 
distortion that is irrelevant to the radiation features of the object surface and is caused by the state 
of sensors, solar illumination, and dispersion and absorption of atmospheric etc. Due to the fact 
that it is expensive and impractical to survey the atmospheric parameter and ground objects of the 
current data, and almost impossible to survey that of the historical data, it is difficult to 
implement absolute radiometric correction in most situations in reality. During relative 
radiometric correction, an image is regarded as reference image. And then adjust the radiation 
features of another image to make it match with the former one. Main methods consist of 
correction by histogram regularization and correction with fixed object. This kind of correction 
can remove or reduce the effects of atmosphere, sensor, and other noises. In addition, it has 
simple algorithm. So it has been widely used (Leonardo, P et al. 2006). 
 
2.2 Multi temporal Image registration 
 
Change detection methods are means of the precise registration for the multi-temporal images. 
The importance of accurate spatial registration of multi-temporal imagery is obvious because 
151 
 
largely spurious results of change detection will be produced if there is misregistration. If high 
registration accuracy isn’t available, a great deal of false change area in the scene will be caused 
by image displacement.  The geometrical registration accuracy of sub-pixel level is necessary to 
change detection. High accuracy registration between multi-temporal is difficult to implement, 
especially in multi-sensor remote sensing images due to many factors, such as imaging models, 
imaging angles and conditions, curvature and rotation of the earth and so on. Especially in the 
mountainous region and urban area, general image registration methods are ineffective and ortho-
rectification is needed. To compare the extracted features or objects the object-oriented method 
known as “buffer detection” can be employed. In this manner the harsh requirement of accurate 
registration can be avoided. In order to avoid image registration impact on change detection, a 
good method is to develop a new algorithm which integrate image registration and change 
detection simultaneously. The core idea of this algorithm is to make full use of no-change objects 
as foundation of image registration, iteratively registering images and detecting change until 
given conditions convergence. The main disadvantage of this method is that algorithm is complex 
and difficult than traditional algorithms (Li, D et al. 2002) 
 
3. Change Detection Approches  
 
We can characterize change detection approaches in two broad fields, namely, bi-temporal 
change detection and temporal trajectory analysis. Former measures changes based on a ‘two-
epoch’ timescale, i.e. the comparison between two dates. The latter analyses the changes based 
on a ‘continuous’ timescale, i.e. the focus of the analysis is not only on what has changed 
between dates, but also on the progress of the change over the period. At present, most change 
detection methods belong to bi-temporal change detection approach. Detection algorithms can be 
attributed to one of the three approaches, namely, direct comparison method, post-analysis 
comparison method and uniform modeling method for bi-temporal change detection. The 
detection elements of direct comparison method include pixel, basic image features and 
transformed features. Elements of post-analysis comparison method mainly include objects 
extracted from images. The two most widely-used methods for object extraction i.e, image 
classification and feature extraction, comparison between objects after classification and feature 
extraction are typical for the post-analysis comparison method.( Singh H, A., 1989,) 
 
The temporal trajectory analysis emphasize more on discovering the trend of change by 
constructing the ‘curves’ or ‘profiles’ of multi-temporal data, compared to the bi-temporal 
analysis. From the viewpoint of processing methods, temporal trajectory analysis can be 
decomposed into bi-temporal change detection and then relative post-processing is implemented 
after the bi-temporal change detection. Besides this, the so-called long time-series analysis 
method can be employed for temporal trajectory analysis. The other important application of 
temporal trajectory analysis is real-time change detection such as video image sequences 
analysis. We have presented the methods of change detection into seven categories (figure 1) i.e., 
direct comparison, classification, object-oriented method, model method, time-series analysis, 
visual analysis and hybrid method (Lu D., Mausel et al. 1993). 
 
Object-oriented approach is also known as object-based comparison method. The basic idea is to 
extract objects from multi-temporal images using image segmentation and feature extraction 
algorithms and then to distinguish the changes between corresponding objects. This method is 
152 
 
 
 
Figure 1 Classification concept of change detection algorithms (after Gong J. et al 2008) 
3.1 Object-oriented approach 
 
mainly applied to applications such as change detection of man-made objects on high-resolution 
images, urban data updating, and military reconnaissance. The approach compares the extracted 
objects directly and so it is not sensitive to data noises as well as distortion. The critical issues 
that are to be addressed are, the methods to compare objects and to identify the changes between 
objects.  (V. Barrile , G. Bilotta 2008) 
 
The main challenge with object-oriented method is the object detection as well as its 
segmentation. Since feature and object extraction from images is often difficult and prone to 
error, in practice this method is mostly applied to image-to-map and rarely used for image-to-
image change detection. In order to overcome this difficulty of object extraction, a prior 
knowledge-based system has to be employed. The other way is to improve the method of image 
segmentation techniques, so that more efficient and accurate object extraction can be achieved. 
(Gong J. et al 2008) 
 
3.2 Model approach 
 
This method is a more application-oriented change, which is different from the other general 
change detection methods such as direct comparison and classification. This method can perceive 
the essential rules of application and make change as the core elements to construct mathematical 
models. The main strategy is to adopt uniform models that integrate all procedures and methods. 
The approach can be grouped into two i.e., models based on processing approaches  and models 
based on the course of processing. The advantage of the model approach is that it considers all 
factors for change detection and can obtain best results. In the approach-based models are to 
model the change contents according to certain postulate conditions, which often closely simulate 
the actual situations for given applications. All procedures of the change detection are integrated 
into a uniform framework and are considered as a whole.( Leonardo P., 2006) 
 
 
153 
 
3.3 Time series approach 
 
This approach used for temporal trajectory analysis. In comparison to bi-temporal change 
detection, the temporal trajectory analysis is mainly based on low spatial resolution images, 
which have a high temporal resolution. The trade-off of using these images is the loss of spatial 
details that makes auto- classification very difficult, so that the temporal trajectory analysis is 
commonly restricted in, for example, vegetation dynamics in large areas, or change trajectories of 
individual land cover classes. 
 
The approaches that are common for time series analysis are, long-time serial analysis and real-
time image sequences analysis. In case of non-real-time long-time serial analysis change 
detection, dynamic Bayesian network seems a good tool. The approach uses the time-series 
dynamic data to produce reliable probabilistic reasoning, which can make both static and 
dynamic analysis on the change detection of remote sensing images. Video monitoring approach 
i.e. the traditional video change detection is based on general video devices applied in bank, 
traffic control and manufacture, techniques of videography has now been applied to aero-survey 
and space-borne remote sensing. The real-time image sequences analysis can therefore be used 
for temporal trajectory analysis. Video monitoring sequence images have high sampling rate in 
time with large data volume. Moreover, the difference between two sequence images can be quite 
large, and sometimes the image quality can be quite poor. To efficiently apply video monitoring 
sequence images to change detection, new challenges are faced to adopt techniques applied in 
video monitoring fields. (Deer, P., 1999) 
 
3.4 Hybrid approach 
 
The combined use of the two or more approaches mentioned above can be called the hybrid 
approach for change detection processing. We can have two typical hybrid forms: one is to use 
different detection methods in different detection phases or procedures (procedure-based hybrid 
analysis) and another is to use different change detection methods respectively and then analyze 
their results comprehensively (result-based hybrid analysis). The main advantage of this approach 
is to make full use of virtues of many algorithms and obtain better change detection results than 
single approach. However, for specific application case how to select hybrid methods is difficult 
and confusing, to harmonize detection results conflicts caused by different methods. These 
problems result in complex algorithm and have low efficiency. (Lu D., Mausel et al 2004, Gong 
J. et al 2008) 
 
Hybrid approach is very good approach but it is difficult to select best combination for given 
application case and classical trial-and-error procedure has to be used so problems become more 
complex. These few reasons limit widespread application to the hybrid method. Depending upon 
the different applications, various change detection applications have been implemented and 
different change detection techniques have been tested. However, last conclusion is that no single 
approach is suitable and universal for all applications even if for specific application choosing 
best method is unknown influenced by different data sources, image quality, characteristics of the 
study area, an analyst’s knowledge of the change detection methods and the skill in handling 
remote sensing data. Because of the difficulty in identifying a suitable method, in practice 
different change detection techniques are often tested and compared to provide a best result based 
on the accuracy assessment or qualitative assessment. (Richard, J et al 2005, Gong J. et al 2008) 
154 
 
4.  Accuracy Assessment For Change Detection 
 
Many factors influence the accuracy of change detection, including precise geometric registration 
and calibration or normalization, availability and quality of ground reference data, the complexity 
of landscape and environment, methods or algorithms used, the analyst’s skills and experience, 
and time and cost restrictions. (Shao 2006) summarized the main errors in change detection 
including errors in data (e.g. image resolution, accuracy of location and image quality), errors 
caused by pre-processing (the accuracy of geometric correction and radiometric correction), 
errors caused by change detection methods and processes (e.g. classification and data extraction 
error), errors in field survey (e.g. accuracy of ground reference) and errors caused by post 
processing. 
 
Remote sensing images classification give rise to accuracy assessment techniques in change 
detection. It is natural to extend the accuracy assessment techniques for processing single time 
image to that of bi-temporal or multi-temporal images. Since it is often difficult, to collect 
reliable multi-temporal ground reference datasets, some alternative approaches have to be 
employed for the assessment of change detection accuracy. There are three general approaches to 
obtain the ground references for bi-temporal change detection, namely, field survey with the 
assistance of historical GIS data, simultaneous, or within the time proximity, high-resolution 
images, and visual interpretation. Each of the three methods has its own advantages and 
disadvantages, and they are dependent upon the application. At the present, accuracy assessment 
of change detection is mainly based on pixel, for these cases, the accuracy assessment 
methodology needs to be considered from a new viewpoint. (Shao 2006) 
 
5.  Discussion And Conclusion 
 
Change detection of remote sensing image is mainly faced with three core problems: the first is 
the process from ground objects to image is not reversible; the second is the entire reconstruction 
from image change to change of the earth’s surface is impossible; and the third is significant 
changes are inevitably influenced by other unimportant changes because common changes exist 
with the ground objects. Obviously these three problems is rightly the reason why no an 
algorithm can satisfy all cases. In order to solve these problems, we present possible approaches 
including the utilization of the multi-source data, priori information and intelligent methods. For 
the first problem, it is possible to adopt multi-source data to make up the deficiency between the 
ground objects and images. The multi-source data including multi-sensor remote sensing images, 
multi-temporal remote sensing images, GIS data, and the ground-related data etc. can be used to 
describe different characteristics of objects from different angles. The priori information and 
knowledge is very important for the second problem. For the third problem it is the core to 
employ intelligent change detection methods to increase detection data and reduce information 
loss during processing. Changes of the multi-temporal images are usually non-linear, so they are 
quite complicated. It seems that non-linear change detection theories and methods have great 
significance in solving change detection. 
 
References 
 
Coppin, P. and Bauer, M., 1996, Digital change detection in forest ecosystems with remote 
sensing imagery, Remote Sensing of the Environment, 13, pp.207-304.  
155 
 
Deer, P., 1999, Digital Change Detection Techniques: Civilian and Military Application 
Published in the UK (Taylar & Francis Ltd). 
Gong Jianya, Sui Haigang, Ma Guorui, Zhou Oiming(2008) A review of milti-temporal remote 
sensing data change detection algorithms, State Key Laboratory for Information Engineering 
in Surveying, Mapping and Remote Sensing, Wuhan University The International Archives of 
the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences. Vol. XXXVII. Part 
B7. Beijing 2008 page757-62 
Leonardo P., Franceisco, G., Jose A., Sobrino, Juan, C., Jimenez, M. and Haydee, K., 2006, 
Radiometric correction effects in landsat multi-date/multi-sensor change detection studies, 
International Journal of Remote Sensing, 2, pp.685-704. 
Li, D., Sui, H. and Xiao, P., 2002, Automatic Change Detection of Geo-spatial Data from 
Imagery, International Archives of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, Xi’an, China, 
Vol.XXXIV, Part 2, pp.245-251. 
Liu, H. and Zhou, Q., 2004, Accuracy analysis of remote sensing change detection by rule-based 
rationality evaluation with post-classification comparison, International Journal of Remote 
Sensing, 25(5), pp.1037-1050 
Lu D., Mausel, P., Brondizio, E. and Moran, E., 2004, Change detection techniques, International 
Journal of Remote Sensing, 25(12), pp.2365-2407. Mouat, D.A., Mahin, G.C. and Lancaster, 
J., 1993, Remote sensing techniques in the analysis of change detection, Geocarto 
International, 2, pp.39–50. 
Ranganath R. Navalgund, V. Jayaraman, P. S. Roy. Remote sensing applications: An overview 
Richard, J., Radke, Srinivas, A., Omar, A.K. and Badrinath, R., 2005, Image Change Detection 
Algorithms: A Systematic Survey, IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, 14(3), pp.294-
307. 
Schumann, G., P. Matgen, and F. Pappenberger (2008b), Condi-tioning water stages from 
satellite imagery on uncertain data points, IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., 5, 810–813. 
Shao F., 2006, Research on change information extraction of remote sensing image based on 
ANN, Master Dissertation, Shandong University of Science and Technology, China 
Singh H, A., 1989, Digital change detection techniques using remotely-sensed data, International 
Journal of Remote Sensing, 10(6), pp.989-1003. 
Sui, H.G., 2002, Automatic change detection for road-networks base on features, Ph.D 
dissertation, Wuhan University, China. 
V. Barrile, G. Bilotta  2008  An Application of remote sensing: Object oriented analysis of 
satellite data. 
Zhang, X.D., 2005, The Theory and Methods of Change Detection Based on Remotely Sensed 
Imagery and GIS, Ph.D Dissertation, Wuhan University, China. 
Zhou, Q., Li, B. and Kurban, A., 2008, Trajectory analysis of land cover change in arid 
environment of China, International Journal of Remote Sensing, 29(4): 1093-1107. 
 
156 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
  
 
 
RADIOACTIVE WASTE: RESIDUAL WASTE FROM BACK END FUEL CYCLE 
 
 
Amartanshu Srivastava1,  Amal Pervez2 and   Dr Govind Singh Bhardwaj3 
 
 
ABSTRACT: Various stages in management of radioactive waste include waste characterization, 
treatment, conditioning, storage, disposal, surveillance, etc. Various options available for 
treatment, conditioning, storage and disposal of these wastes depending on their physical forms 
are also indicated. These descriptions presented herein are intended to be general and apply to the 
management of radioactive waste from mining, milling, fuel-fabrication, nuclear power 
generation, medical and industrial application of radioactive materials and environmental 
restoration. These apply to radioactive waste that’s generated during the operational period as 
well as during the decommissioning of a facility. The applicability of these steps therefore is 
likely to vary depending on the type of radioactive waste. 
keywords: Radioactive waste, Residual waste, Back end fuel cycle      
                            
1.  Introduction 
The waste first characterized in order to determine its physical, chemical and radiological 
properties and to facilitate documentation, record keeping and acceptance of radioactive waste 
from one step to another. Characterization may be applied in order to segregate radioactive 
materials either for exemption, reuse and disposal methods or to assure the compliance of waste 
packages with requirements for storage and disposal. Storage of radioactive waste involves 
maintaining the radioactive waste i.e. isolation, environmental protection and monitoring are 
provided, and actions involving treatment, conditioning and disposal are facilitated. Pre-treatment 
of waste is the initial step in waste management that occurs after waste generation. It consists of 
collection, segregation, chemical adjustment and decontamination and may include a period of 
interim storage. The initial step is extremely important because it provides the best opportunity to 
segregate waste streams and radioactive waste. Conditioning of radioactive waste involves those 
operations that transform radioactive waste into a solid form that’s suitable for handling, 
transportation, storage and disposal. The operation includes immobilization of radioactive waste, 
placing the waste into containers and providing additional packaging. Common immobilization 
                                                        
1 ,2B.E. (Mining Engineering) Student, Department of Mining Engineering, CTAE, MPUAT, Udaipur -
313001, INDIA 
3Assistant Professor, Department of Mining Engineering, CTAE, MPUAT, Udaipur -313001, INDIA 
email: bhardwaj_gs@rediffmail.com 
 
157 
 
methods include solidification of low and intermediate level radioactive waste in cement or 
polymer, and vitrification of high-level liquid waste in a glass matrix. This immobilized waste, in 
turn, may be packed in containers ranging from the common 200 L steel drum to high integrity 
thick-walled containers, depending on the nature of radionuclides and their concentrations. 
Disposal is the final step in the radioactive waste management system. It consists mainly of the 
emplacement of radioactive waste into a disposal facility with reasonable assurance for safety, 
without the intention of retrieval and without reliance on long term surveillance and maintenance. 
The safety, mainly achieved by isolation, is attained by placing barriers 
around the radioactive waste in order to restrict the release of radionuclides around the 
environment. The barriers can be either natural or engineered and an isolation system can consist 
of one or more barriers. A system of multiple barriers gives greater assurance of isolation and 
assists in minimizing the release of radionuclides to the environment. Barriers can either provide 
absolute containment for a period of time, such as a metal wall of a container, or may retard the 
release of radioactive materials to the environment, such as a backfill or host rock with a high 
absorption capability. During the period when the radioactive waste is contained by a system of 
barriers, the radionuclides in the waste undergo decay, thereby reducing hazard with time. The 
barrier system is designed according to the disposal option chosen and the radioactive waste 
forms involved. 
Although disposal of most types of radioactive waste is by concentration and containment, 
disposal may also comprise the discharge of effluents into the environment within authorized 
limits, with subsequent dispersion. The authorized limits are site specific and vary from coastal to 
inland sites. 
 
2.  Classification of Radioactive Waste 
 
Nuclear waste can be generally classified as either ‘lowlevel’ radioactive waste or ‘high-level’ 
radioactive 
waste. 
 
2.1  Low-level radioactive waste 
 
Basically all radioactive waste that is not high-level radioactive waste or intermediate-level waste 
or transuranic waste is classified as low-level radioactive waste. Volume-wise it may be larger 
than that of highlevel radioactive waste or intermediate-level radioactive waste or transuranic 
waste, but the radioactivity contained in the low-level radioactive waste is significantly less and 
made up of isotopes having much shorter halflives than most of the isotopes in high-level 
radioactive waste or intermediate-level waste or transuranic waste. Large amounts of waste 
contaminated with small amounts of radionuclides, such as contaminated equipment (glove 
boxes, air filters, shielding materials and laboratory equipment) protective clothing, cleaningrags, 
etc. constitute low-level radioactive waste. Even components of decommissioned reactors may 
come underthis category (after part decontamination procedures). The level of radioactivity and 
half-lives of radioactiveisotopes in low-level waste are relatively small. Storing the waste for a 
period of 10 to 50 years will allow most of the radioactive isotopes in low-level waste to decay, at 
which point the waste can be disposed of as normal refuse. 
158 
 
2.2  High-level radioactive waste 
 
High-level radioactive waste is conceptualized as the waste consisting of the spent fuel, the liquid 
effluents arising from the reprocessing of spent fuel and the solids into which the liquid waste is 
converted. It consists, generally, material from the core of a nuclear reactor or a nuclear weapon. 
This waste includes uranium, plutonium and other highly radioactive elements created during 
fission, made up of fission fragments and transuranics. (Note that this definition does not specify 
the radioactivity that must be present to categorize as high-level radioactive waste.) These two 
components have different times to decay. The radioactive fission fragments decay to different 
stable elements via different nuclear reaction chains involving  ,   and   emissions to 
innocuous levels of radioactivity, and this would take about 1000 years. On the other hand, 
transuranics take nearly 500,000 years to reach such levels. Heat output lasts over 200 years. 
Most of the radioactive isotopes in high-level waste emit large amounts of radiation and have 
extremely long half-lives (some longer than 100,000 years), creating long time-periods before the 
waste will settle to safe levels of radioactivity. As a thumb-rule one may note that ‘volumes of 
lowlevel radioactive waste and intermediate-level waste greatly exceed those of spent fuel or 
high-level radioactive waste’. In spite of this ground reality, the public concerns regarding 
disposal of high-level radioactive waste is worldwide and quite controversial. 
 
 2.3  Radioactivity 
Certain elements that compose matter emit particles and radiations spontaneously. This 
phenomenon is referred to as ‘radioactivity’, it cannot be altered by application of heat, electricity 
or any other force and remains unchangeable. Three different kinds of rays, known as alpha, beta 
and gamma rays are associated with radioactivity. The alpha rays consist of particles (nuclei of 
helium atoms) carrying a positive charge, beta rays particles have negative charge (streams of 
electrons) and gamma rays are chargeless electromagnetic radiation with shorter wavelengths 
than any X-rays. These ‘rays’ can penetrate living tissues for short distances and affect the tissue 
cells. But because they can disrupt chemical bonds in the molecules of important chemicals 
within the cells, they help in treating cancers and other diseases. Every element can be made to 
emit such rays artificially. If such radioactive elements are placed in the body through food or by 
other methods, the rays can be traced through the body. This use of tracer elements is extremely 
helpful in monitoring life processes. Geologists use radioactivity to determine the age of rocks. 
As atoms lose particles as heavy as nuclei of helium, they become atoms of some other element. 
That is, the elements change or ‘transmute’ into other elements until the series ends with a stable 
element. Radioactive elements decay at different rates. Rates are measured as half-lives – that is, 
the time it takes for one half of any given quantity of a radioactive element to disintegrate. The 
longest half-life is that of the ‘isotope’ 238U of uranium. It is 4.5 billion years. Some isotopes 
have half-lives of years, months, days, minutes, seconds, or even less than millionths of a second. 
Measurement units and permissible dosages Radioactivity is measured in Becquerel (Bq) units. 1 
Bq = 1 decay or disintegration per second. Curie (Ci) was used earlier and 1 Ci = 37 billion Bq 
(3.7 ´ 1010 disintegrations per second) or 37 Bq = 1 nano-Ci. To measure the health risk through 
ionization, in the US the most commonly used unit is rem or mrem (millirem). In Europe, the 
most commonly used measuring unit for this purpose is Sv (Sievert) or mSv (milli-Sv). 
Conversion of rem to Sieverts: 1 rem = 0.01 Sv = 10 mSv. 
 
159 
 
 
 
 
 
                    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1Nuclear fuel cycle. 
 
3.  Milling and the Tailings 
The Uranium is extracted in the mills through the hydro metallurgical process. After three stages 
of crushing the crushed ore undergoes two stages of wet grinding. The slurry is filtered to obtain 
uranium liquor. This uranium liquor is purified and concentrated by the ion exchange method and 
further precipitated ‘yellow cake’ (U3O8). This is thickened, washed, filtered and dried in the 
sprayed drier and finally packed in drums and transported to the Nuclear Fuel Complex to be 
processed into fuel pellets. The slurry or the ‘tailings’ are left behind for deposit. Uranium mill 
tailings are dumped as sludge in the ‘tailing’ ponds or (tailing dams). 
3.1 Potential Hazards from Uranium Mill Tailings 
Radionuclides contained in uranium tailings emit 20 to 100 times as much gamma radiations as 
natural background levels on deposit surfaces. Gamma radiation level decrease rapidly with the 
distance from the pile.The radium-226 in tailing continuously decays to the radioactive gad 
radon-222, the decay product of which can cause lung cancer. Some of this radon escapes from 
the interior of the pile. Radon releases are a major hazard that continues even after uranium mines 
are shut down. Since radon spreads quickly with the wind, many people receive small additional 
radiation doses. Although the excess risk for the individual is small, it cannot be neglected due to 
the large number of people concerned. Tailings deposits are subjected to many kinds of erosion. 
Due to the long half lives of the radioactive constituents involved, the safety of the deposit has to 
be guaranteed for very long periods of time. After rainfall, erosion gullies can form; floods can 
destroy the whole deposit; plants and burrowing animals can penetrate into the deposit and 
disperse the material, enhance radon emanation and make the deposit more susceptible to climate 
erosion. When the surface of the pile dries out, the fine sands are blown by the wind over 
adjacent areas. 
Uranium 
Mining 
Processing Uranium 
D U shells for 
Tanks 
Depleted 
Uranium 
Enrichment 
Plant 
Weapons 
Waste 
Nuclear 
Reactor 
Uranium 
Plant 
Fuel 
Uranium 
160 
 
Seepage from tailings piles has another major hazard. Seepage poses a risk of contamination to 
ground and surface water. People nearby are also threatened by radium-226 and other hazardous 
substances like arsenic in their drinking water supplies and the fish from the area. The seepage 
problem is very important with acidic tailings as the radio nuclides involve are more mobile 
under acidic conditions. In tailings that contain pyrite, acidic conditions automatically develop 
due to inherent production of sulphuric acid, which increase the migration of contaminants to the 
environment. The structural integrity of the tailings dam is another concern. Tailings dam are 
often not of stable construction. At times they have been made from sedimentation of coarse 
fraction of the tailing’s sludge. Further danger to the ponds may arise if these are built on 
geological faults. Tailings for the purpose of backfilling into the mines are transported to the 
mining sites in open trucks that are covered with tarpaulin on a daily basis. The trucks that carry 
the ore to the mill take back the tailings. Spillage during the transportation might happen, besides 
there is a threat of accident as well. The conditions under which these are stores and handled 
during backfilling operations are not known. 
3.2 Tailing Treatment and Disposal 
Two types of waste are generated while processing uranium ore liquor depleted in uranium from 
ion exchange unit after uranium recovery and filtered cake depleted in uranium from filtration 
from leached slurry. According to UCIL, both are neutralized with limestone and lime slurry to 
precipitate the remaining radio nuclides along with heavy metals. The neutralized slurry is 
classified and the coarse faction is pumped back to the mines for backfilling the voids. 
This forms almost three quarters of the tailings. The remaining one quarter which is in form of 
fine particles , is pumped into the tailing ponds, where lime settles and remaining waste is 
decanted through decantation wells. This waster is sent to the effluent treatment plant for re 
treatment. According to UCIL it has a composite scheme for reclamation of water and effluent 
retreatment to make the final discharge effluent environmentally safe. Water from all the mines is 
collected, clarified and reused in the ore processing plant. The tailings pond effluent is also 
clarified and a part of this is sent to an ore processing plant for re use. The remaining is treated 
with barium chloride and lime, clarified and the settled precipitates are sent back to tailings pond. 
The harmless liquor is discharged. 
The obvious idea of bringing the tailings back to where the ore has been taken from doesn’t in 
most cases lead to an acceptable solution for tailings disposal. Although most of the uranium was 
extracted from the metal, it has not become less hazardous; in fact it’s quite to the contrary. Most 
of the contaminants (85% of the total radioactivity) are still present, and the material has been 
brought by mechanical and chemical process to a condition where the contaminants are much 
more mobile and thus susceptible to migration in to the environment. Therefore, dumping the 
tailings in an underground mine cannot be afforded in most cases. There they would be in direct 
contact with ground water after halting the pumps (upon mine closure).  
The situation is similar for deposit of tailings for open pit mines. Here to, immediate contact with 
ground waster exists, or seepage presents risks of contamination of ground water. Only in the 
case of presence of proven impermeable geologic or man-made layers can the contamination risk 
to ground water be prevented. An advantage of an in pit deposition is relatively good protection 
form erosion. 
161 
 
 
4.  Approaches to Radioactive Waste Disposal 
 
Solid waste disposal, of waste such as municipal garbage, is based on three well-known methods, 
namely landfills, incineration and recycling. Sophisticated methods of landfills are adapted for 
radioactive waste also. However, during incineration of ordinary waste, fly ash, noxious gases 
and chemical contaminants are released into the air. If radioactive waste is treated in this manner, 
the emissions would contain radioactive particulate matter. Hence when adapted, one uses fine 
particulate filters and the gaseous effluents are diluted and released. Recycling to some extent is 
feasible. We have already dealt with the reprocessing approach, whereby useful radioactive 
elements are recovered for cyclic use. But it still leaves some waste that is a part of the high-level 
radioactive waste. Radioactive waste management involves minimizing radioactive residues, 
handling waste-packing safely, storage and safe disposal in addition to keeping sites of origin of 
radioactivity clean. Poor practices lead to future problems. Hence choice of sites where 
radioactivity is to be managed safely is equally important in addition to technical expertise and 
finance, to result in safe and environmentally sound solutions. The International Atomic Energy 
Agency (IAEA) is promoting acceptance of some basic tenets by all countries for radioactive 
waste management. These include:  
  (i) Securing acceptable level of protection of human health; 
 (ii) Provision of an acceptable level of protection of environment; 
 (iii) While envisaging  
(i) and (ii), assurance of negligible effects beyond national boundaries; 
 (iv) Acceptable impact on future generations;  
 (v) No undue burden on future generations. 
 
 There are other legal, control, generation, safety and management aspects also. Next we review 
some approaches for radioactive waste disposal. To begin with, the radioactive waste 
management approach is to consider the nature of radioactive elements involved in terms of their 
half-lives and thenchoose the appropriate method of handling. If the concentrations of radioactive 
elements are largely shortlived, then one would resort to what is referred to as ‘delay and decay’ 
approach; that is, to hold on to such a waste for a sufficiently long time that the radioactivity will 
die in the meanwhile. A second approach is to ‘dilute and disperse’ so that the hazard in the 
environment is minimized. But when the radioactivity is long-lived, the only approach that is 
possible is to ‘concentrate and contain’ the activity. In order to carry out concentrating the waste 
(generally the sludge), chemical precipitation, ion exchange, reverse osmosis and natural or steam 
evaporation, centrifuging, etc. are resorted to. The resulting solids are highly concentrated in 
radioactivity. In the following we shall discuss some of the approaches that are being advocated 
or are currently in practice. However, to the extent that the mining operations result in ‘bringing 
the radioactivity to the surface and change its chemical and physical form that may increase   its 
mobility in the environment’, they assume importance in radioactive waste management. Long-
lived isotopes like 230Th, 226Ra, the decay products of uranium are part of the tailings and 
hence the tailings have to be contained. Low-level radioactive waste and even transuranic waste 
is often buried in shallow landfills. One has to pay attention to any groundwater contamination 
that may result due to this. The highly radioactive liquid effluents are expected to be ultimately 
solidified into a leach-resistant form such as borosilicate glass, which is fairly robust in the sense 
that it is chemically durable, resistant to radiolysis, relatively insensitive to fluctuations in waste 
composition and easy to process remotely. (Immobilization in cement matrices or bitumanization 
162 
 
or polymerization are also some of the other options that are practised to some extent.) However, 
it must be noted that plutonium does not bind strongly to the matrix of the glass and ‘thus can be 
loaded only in trace amounts to prevent the possibility of criticality or recovery for clandestine 
purposes’. This glass in turn is placed in canisters made of specific alloys. Choice of the canister 
material would depend on the ultimate site where the waste will be disposed- off. For example, if 
the ultimate disposal is in the oceans, the alloy chosen must have low corrosion rates under the 
environmental temperature, pressure, oxygen concentration, etc. Studies have been carried out in 
this respect. For example, it is found that in oxygenated sea water at 250oC, 7 mega Pascals 
pressure and 1750 ppm of dissolved oxygen, the corrosion rates of 1018 mild steel, copper, lead, 
50 : 10 cupro-nickel, Inconel 600 and Ticode 12 are 11.0, 5.0, 1.0, 0.7, 0.1 and 0.06 mm/year, 
respectively. One seeks to dispose-off the high-level radioactive waste packages contained in 
multiple metal-barrier canisters within natural or man-made barriers, to contain radioactivity for 
periods as long as 10,000 to 100,000 years. ‘The barrier is a mechanism or medium by which the 
movement of emplaced radioactive materials is stopped or retarded significantly or access to the 
radioactive materials is restricted or prevented’. It is obvious that recourse to multiple barriers 
may assure safety of emplaced radioactivity over long periods of time. The man-made barriers, 
namely the form to which waste is reduced, for example, in the glassy form, and the canister 
along with overpackaging, go along with natural barriers. As far as the choice of natural barriers 
is concerned, land-based mined depositories over fairly stable geologic formations are preferred 
over disposal in the oceans. However several social and environmental concerns have prevented 
the land-route being adopted in counties like USA even after 50 years of accumulation of 
radioactive waste. Therefore proposals have been made to take to the ocean-route and there also 
the choice varies from just placement of the canisters over the seabed to placement within the 
sub-seabed sediments and even within the basement rocks.  The following options have been 
aired sometime or the other. Each one of the options demands serious studies and technical 
assessments: 
 
· Deep geological repositories 
· Ocean dumping ·  Seabed burial 
· Sub-seabed disposal 
· Seductive waste disposal method 
· Transforming radioactive waste to non-radioactive stable waste 
· Dispatching to the Sun. 
 
Major problems due to legal, social, political and financial reasons have arisen in execution due 
to 
 
· Environmental perceptions 
· Lack of awareness and education 
· ‘Not-in-my-backyard’ syndrome 
· ‘Not-in-the-ocean’ syndrome 
· Lack of proven technology.     
163 
 
 
                      
Figure 2: Schematic Diagram of Waste Disposal 
 
 
5.  Geologic Disposal 
 
Geologic disposal in deep geological formations –whether under continental crust or under 
seabed – as a means of radioactive waste disposal has been recognized since 1957, for handling 
long-lived waste. Quite often, contrary to views expressed by environmentalists, it is ‘not chosen 
as a cheap and dirty option to get the radioactive waste simply “out of site and out of mind”’. The 
deep geological sites provide a natural isolation system that is stable over hundreds of thousands 
of years to contain long-lived radioactive waste. In practice it is noted that low-level radioactive 
waste is generally disposed in near-surface facilities or old mines. High-level radioactive waste is 
disposed in host rocks that are crystalline (granitic, gneiss) or argillaceous (clays) or salty or tuff. 
Since, in most of the countries, there is not a big backlog of high-level radioactive waste urgently 
awaiting disposal, interim storage facilities, which allow cooling of the wastes over a few 
decades, are in place. 
 
5.1 Ocean-dumping 
 
For many years the industrialized countries of the world (e.g. USA, France, Great Britain, etc.) 
opted for the least expensive method for disposal of the wastes by dumping them into the oceans. 
Before 1982, when the United States Senate declared a moratorium on the dumping of 
radioactive wastes, the US dumped an estimated 112,000 drums at thirty different sites in the 
Atlantic and Pacific oceans. 
164 
 
 
 
Figure 3: Conceptual model for very deep borehole disposal. 
 
Though this practice has been banned by most of the countries with nuclear programmes, the 
problem still persists. Russia, which currently controls sixty per cent of the world’s nuclear 
reactors, continues to dispose of its nuclear wastes into the oceans. According to Russia’s 
Minister of Ecology, it will continue to dump its wastes into the oceans because it has no other 
alternative method. It will continue to do so until it receives enough international aid to create 
proper storage facilities. In response, the United States has pledged money to help Russia, but the 
problem continues. Although radioactive waste has known negative effects on humans and other 
animals, no substantial scientific proof of bad effects on the ocean and marine life has been 
found. Hence some nations have argued that ocean-dumping should be continued. Others argue 
that the practice should be banned until further proof of no harm is available. Oceanic Disposal 
Management Inc., a British Virgin Islands company, has also proposed disposing of nuclear and 
asbestos waste by means of Free-Fall Penetrators. Essentially, waste-filled missiles, which when 
dropped through 4000 m of water, will embed themselves 60–80 m into the seabed’s clay 
sediments. These penetrators are expected to survive for 700 to 1500 years. Thereafter the waste 
will diffuse through the sediments. This was a method considered by the Scientific Working 
Group (SWG) of the Nuclear Energy Agency (NEA) during the eighties. Penetrator disposal is 
potentially both feasible and safe, its implementation would depend on international acceptance 
and the development of an appropriate international regulatory framework. Neither of these 
exists, nor are they likely to in the foreseeable future. The penetrator method has also been 
further constrained by a recent revision of the definition of ‘dumping’, by the London Dumping 
Convention, to include ‘any deliberate disposal or storage of wastes or other matter in the seabed 
and the subsoil thereof’. 
 
6.  Sub-Seabed Disposal 
 
Seabed disposal is different from sea-dumping which does not involve isolation of low-level 
radioactivewaste within a geological strata. The floor of deep oceans is a part of a large tectonic 
plate situated some 5 km below the sea surface, covered by hundreds of metres of thick 
sedimentary soft clay. These regions are desert-like, supporting virtually no life. The Seabed 
Burial Proposal envisages drilling these ‘mud flats’ to depths of the order of hundreds of metres, 
165 
 
such boreholes being spaced apart several hundreds of metres. The high-level radioactive waste 
contained in canisters, to which we have referred to earlier, would be lowered into these holes 
and stacked vertically one above the other interspersed by 20 m or more of mud pumped in. The 
proposal to use basement-rock in oceans for radioactive waste disposal is met with some 
problems: variability of the rock and high local permeability. Oceanic water has a mixing time of 
the order of a few thousand years which does not serve as a good barrier for long-lived 
radionuclides.     
 
7.  Subductive Waste Disposal Method 
 
This method is the state-of-the-art in nuclear waste disposal technology. It is the single viable 
means of disposing radioactive waste that ensures non return of the relegated material to the 
biosphere. At the same time, it affords inaccessibility to eliminated weapons material. The 
principle involved is the removal of the material from the biosphere faster than it can return. It is 
considered that ‘the safest, the most sensible, the most economical, the most stable long-term, the 
most environmentally benign, the most utterly obvious places to get rid of nuclear waste, high-
level waste or lowlevel waste is in the deep oceans that cover 70% of the planet’. Subduction is a 
process whereby one tectonic plate slides beneath another and is eventually reabsorbed into the 
mantle. The subductive waste disposal method forms a high-level radioactive waste repository in 
a subducting plate, so that the waste will be carried beneath the Earth’s crust where it will be 
diluted and dispersed through the mantle. The rate of subduction of a plate in one of the world’s 
slowest subduction zones is 2.1 cm annually. This is faster than the rate (1 mm annually) 
of diffusion of radionuclides through the turbidite sediments that would overlay a repository 
constructed in accordance with this method. The subducting plate is naturally predestined for 
consumption in the Earth’s mantle. The subducting plate is constantly renewed at its originating 
oceanic ridge. The slow movement of the plate would seal any vertical fractures over a repository 
at the interface between the subducting plate and the overriding plate. 
 
7.1 Transmutation of high-level radioactive waste 
 
This route of high-level radioactive waste envisages that one may use transmutational devices, 
consisting of a hybrid of a subcritical nuclear reactor and an accelerator of charged particles to 
‘destroy’ radioactivity by neutrons. ‘Destroy’ may not be the proper word; what is effected is that 
the fission fragments can be transmuted by neutron capture and beta decay, to produce stable 
nuclides. Transmutation of actinides involves several competing processes, namely neutron-
induced fission, 
neutron capture and radioactive decay. The large number of neutrons produced in the spallation 
reaction by the accelerator are used for ‘destroying’ the radioactive material kept in the 
subcritical reactor. The scheme has not yet been demonstrated to be practical and costeffective. 
 
7.2 Solar option 
 
It is proposed that ‘surplus weapons’ plutonium and other highly concentrated waste might be 
placed in the Earth orbit and then accelerated so that waste would drop into the Sun. Although 
theoretically possible, it involves vast technical development and extremely high cost compared 
to other means of waste disposal. Robust containment would be required to ensure that no waste 
would be released in the event of failure of the ‘space transport system’.      
166 
 
Conclusions 
 
The problems associated with radioactive waste management on a long-term are major ones that 
humanity has not been able to come to terms with so far. The problem of radioactive waste 
management has been compared to a Gordian knot. The Gordian knot should not be just sliced 
through quick and deftly. As American Ambassador Rich III put it, ‘The obstacles cannot be over 
soon or ignored. We must untie the Gordian knot carefully and painstakingly, using all of our 
resources and democratic institutions wisely and well’. As time passes by, new issues crop up, 
which need to be discussed. One example is how does one ‘plan for retirement of nuclear 
facilities’, sometimes referred to as ‘decommissioning of facilities’. Similarly changes in 
concepts of long-term issues on health and safety need to be addressed – ‘dose and risk for a 
remote time in the future are not believable, since habits of human populations are impossible to 
be predicted’. All options have not been examined in totality. ‘The value of learning by holistic 
studies of so-called natural analogues is getting appreciated. These are natural systems (such as 
ore bodies, clay beds and alkaline springs) or archaeological artifacts (Roman glasses, ancient 
metallic objects and so on) that exhibit some of the key features that repository analysts need to 
understand. By studying how these systems have evolved over geological time scales, one can 
gain insights into future repository evolution... The problems will not be solved by throwing 
unlimited money at them. Some processes take their own time to fructify…’. 
 
References 
 
Rao K.R, Article  Radioactive waste: The problem and its management 
IAEA Bull., 2000, vol. 42, contains a large number of articles related to radioactive waste 
management. This publication gave an impetus for writing this review. 
Special issue on Radioactive Waste – Five articles in Phys.Today, June 1997 and subsequent 
letters. 
Articles in ‘Confronting The Nuclear Legacy’ in three parts, Sci. Am., 1996–1998. 
Natarajan, R., in IANCAS Bull., July 1998, p. 27. 
Kumra, M. S. and Bansal, N. A., in Facets of Nuclear Science and Technology, Department of 
Atomic Energy, Mumbai, 1993. 
Surender Kumar, et al., IAEA-SM-357/38, 1999. 
Tiwari Manish , “A Deformed Existence”, Down to Earth, 15 June 1999 
Many resources on the world-wide-web.                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
167 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
RADIOACTIVE WASTE MANAGEMENT 
 
 
Amal Pervez1, Amartanshu Srivastava2 and Dr. Govind Singh Bhardwaj3 
 
 
ABSTRACT: During the processing of uranium ore, some radio-nuclides are generated and 
remain in the tailings as it is not possible to recover the entire uranium from the ore. Thus a very 
little amount of uranium always goes with the tailings. Radionuclides contained in uranium 
tailings emit 20 to 100 times as much gamma radiations as natural background levels on deposit 
surfaces. Some reagents added during the process of extraction create some chemical toxins and 
remain within the tailings. Therefore the management of tailings has been given utmost 
importance, since these products contain some radio-nuclides as well as toxins and need to be 
stored and processed in a proper facility. Various stages in management of radioactive waste 
include waste characterization, treatment, conditioning, storage, disposal, surveillance, etc. 
Various options available for treatment, conditioning, storage and disposal of these wastes 
depending on their physical forms are also indicated. Thus very strict steps are to be undertaken 
while designing and making a tailing dam as the tailings after milling is sent to the tailing dams. 
The applicability of these steps therefore is likely to vary depending on the type of radioactive 
waste. Comprehensive tailings disposal plan having first been designed to conform to 
international standards and agreed to by the relevant authorities. Previous bad practices and 
growing public concern have led to the introduction of regulations in all jurisdictions, where 
uranium mining and milling is undertaken. 
 
keywords: Radioactive waste, tailing pond, classification, planning & designing, remediation. 
 
1.   Classification of  Uranium Mill Tailings 
 
The volume of tailings piles varies from several hundred to several tens of millions of cubic 
metres, depending on the size, nature and duration of the operation. The activity of the tailings 
depends on the grade of ore mined and varies from less than 1 Bq/g to more than 100 Bq/g. The 
grain size distribution plays a major role in the physical stability, consolidation and hydraulic 
properties of the tailings. It is related to the nature of the host rock, the texture of the 
mineralization and the crushing and grinding processes applied in extraction. A classification 
based on various geotechnical and phenomenological criteria has been proposed[2] (Fig. 1).The 
chemistry of tailings depends mainly on the leaching process (acid or alkaline) and the 
                                                        
1B.E. (Mining Engineering) Student, Department of Mining Engineering, CTAE, MPUAT, Udaipur -
313001, INDIA 
3Assistant Professor, Department of Mining Engineering, CTAE, MPUAT, Udaipur -313001, INDIA 
email: bhardwaj_gs@rediffmail.com 
 
168 
 
mineralogy of the ore. Wastes from the mining of sulphidic ores tend to produce acid leachate, 
which can mobilise radionuclides and other hazardous components of the tailings. Trace element 
concentrations in the ore and process chemicals may have a major influence on the tailings 
chemistry and its total environmental impact. 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Proposed classification of tailings 
 
2.  Designing 
 
While designing the tailings pond adequate measures have been taken to store the tailings for a 
very long period of time. The pond is located at a safe distance from the population to avoid any 
direct contamination. The embankment constructed on all the sides surrounding the tailings is 
designed to take the load of entire quantity of ore available in the deposits. The material used in 
construction of embankment consists of impervious clay towards the upstream, random fill 
material on the downstream side and toe of rock-fill material. At each stage of the dam 
construction, site studies are conducted to ensure proper strength, slope and height determining 
the stability. Quality control tests are carried out to ensure the quality of the work as well as 
construction materials. The permanent drains have been constructed on all sides so as to prevent 
the flow of rain water into the pond. The decantation wells are strategically placed at the inner 
periphery of the pond allowing the excess water only to flow out. This water is carried to the 
effluent treatment plant for necessary processing through a well-laid drainage system. 
Encroachment into the tailings pond area is prohibited by erection of permanent fences all 
around. Security personnel are also posted at site as guard against any entry. Large part of the 
pond is covered with vegetation to prohibit re-suspension of dust into the atmosphere. In the new 
processing sites, UCIL proposes to adopt several new technologies like laying of an artificial 
impermeable layer on the surface of the pond to avoid excursion of effluent into the ground 
water. A newer method called thickened tailings disposal system is also being contemplated. 
 
3.  Planning  
 
In planning the closeout of a tailing impoundment or pile, the planners must have a good and 
comprehensive understanding of the hazards involved and the means of controlling such hazards.  
169 
 
 
 
Figure 2: Types of ground  impoundment 
 
The specific activity of such materials is typically low in comparison to that of some wastes from 
other parts of the nuclear fuel cycle, although tailings that result from the milling of high grade 
ores can represent a radiological hazard comparable to that of low level radioactive waste. While 
tailings and residues from the mining and milling of radioactive ores can generally be 
categorized as very low level waste, the quantity of material requiring disposal is much larger 
than the quantity of waste from other parts of the nuclear fuel cycle. As part of the planning for 
the decommissioning/closeout of mill tailings impoundments, an assessment will have to be 
made to determine, if the present impoundment and site will safely retain the tailings and the 
contained radioactive and chemically toxic pollutants for the length of time required by 
regulatory criteria. If the safety assessment shows that the present impoundment would not be 
safe for the required length of time, remedial actions would have to be undertaken to bring it up 
to standard. If the site is unsatisfactory and the impoundment cannot be improved to compensate 
for site inadequacies, it may be necessary to relocate the tailings on-site or to a new site. In 
planning for the closeout for the closeout of tailings impoundments, the following guidelines 
should be considered. 
 
(1) Radioactive and non-radioactive contaminants released to the environment during and 
after closeout should not exceed authorized limits and should be as low as reasonably achievable, 
taking into account economic and social factors; 
(2) Reliance on long-term active institutional controls as a means of adhering to regulatory 
criteria after closeout is complete should be minimized; 
(3) Passive barriers, either natural or engineered, should be favoured 
(4) Containment systems should be designed so that degradation leads to gradual rather than 
sudden release of contaminants 
(5) Requirements for the maintenance of containment systems should be minimized and 
options requiring frequent maintenance should not be used. 
 
In addition to the above items, planning for the closeout of tailings impoundments may include, 
as appropriate, the following information: 
(1) Plans for the stabilization of tailings impoundments in situ or relocation to another site; 
(2) Plans for the control of spillage and dust; 
(3) Methods for the long term control of contaminant releases; 
170 
 
(4) Methods for the control of intrusion and unauthorized removal of tailings; 
(5) Methods for the control of groundwater contamination; 
(6) Plans for the cleanup and release of contaminated areas. 
 
The major technical features associated with tailings impoundments include covers, vegetation, 
perimeter dams, dykes or embankments, basal features, water diversion and control features and 
foundations. For the closeout of an impoundment, these features must meet regulatory standards, 
or be brought up to these standards by remedial work. 
 
In most cases, tailings in an impoundment may have to be covered to limit radon exhalation, 
moisture infiltration, gamma radiation, oxidation, intrusion by human, plants and animals and 
erosion. 
 
 
 
Fig 3: Different techniques of raises construction. 
 
Cover material can be classified broadly as natural (soil, rock, clay, vegetation, etc.), artificial 
(plastics, asphalt, soil/concrete mixtures, etc.) and water. The materials may be used in different 
combinations, configurations and thickness. A combination of two or more materials may 
improve cover performance and provide added resistance against detrimental process such as 
erosion and bio intrusion. However, in some cases, for example, where long term settlements are 
to be expected, a complex cover design may have disadvantages because of its vulnerability. 
 
The long term performance of synthetic material is questionable, since they may degrade and fail 
to function as required. In addition, they may be too expensive. A water cover will prevent radon 
exhalation, erosion and intrusion. Where tailings are susceptible to acid production, water may 
be a desirable approach for excluding oxygen. Issues such as groundwater contamination and 
retaining dam stability should be included in the assessment of water covers. 
 
If the water level is controlled by an artificial dam, long term institutional control may be 
required to ensure that the integrity of this structure is maintained. Should the dam fail, the water 
cover, and possibly a portion of the tailings, would be lost. In addition to the significant hazards 
associated with the dam failure itself, problems could arise with radon exhalation, dust, erosion 
and migration of tailings. One disadvantage of a water cover is that it creates a hydrostatic head  
 
171 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4: Cover design for the UMTRA Monticello containment structure, Utah 
 
on the porewater system, possibly causing contaminants to move into groundwater or surface 
water systems. 
 
An alternative is to place the tailings into a natural water body, both during production or as a 
relocation option, if required. Although this is a promising technology, there may be 
considerable social pressures against sacrificing a lake for such waste disposal. Table-1 shows a 
checklist for cover component functions. 
 
4. Geochemical Processes 
 
The main factors affecting the extent and kinetics of metal release from tailings include the 
nature, composition, pre-treatment, and dispersion of solids, and the composition, volume and 
flow rate of the leaching solution. 
 
However, metals and radionuclides are not uniformly distributed in the solid material from the 
tailings. It has been suggested that the occurrence of various mechanisms that may contribute to 
radionuclide and metal stratification in tailings could include: 
 
(1) the accumulation of fines, including precipitates of gypsum and metal hydroxides, in the 
lower zone because of settling processes during initial deposition of the tailings;  
(2) the precipitation, co-precipitation and adsorption of major metals and trace radionuclides 
from neutralized process water; and 
(3) pyrite oxidation, leaching and desorption of metals and radionuclides in the top upper 
zone, producing highly acidic, high total dissolved solids (TDS) pore water which predominantly 
172 
 
migrates downwards (solute transport) with precipitation, co precipitation, and absorption, 
occurring in the neutralized buffer zone (redeposition). 
Table: 1 Checklist for cover component functions. 
 
 
173 
 
It can be supposed that the mechanisms accounting for the stratification of metal and 
radionuclides in the tailings involve the oxidation of residual pyrite (0.2%), caused by means of 
oxygen diffusion into the tailings. Bacterial activity may play a relevant role here. The acid 
produced in this zone is able to remove significant amounts of Zn, Mn and 238U from the tailings. 
These elements are then transported downward with the flux of seepage water. As the acid water 
reaches a saturated zone with high pH values, the precipitation of these elements occur. The 
elevated pH are caused by the fact that the wastes were discharged in the tailings dam as a high 
pH solution. Part of it reacted with the acid produced in the upper zones and the rest migrated to 
the deeper zones. Since effluents are no longer discharged to the tailings dam, rain water is the 
only water supply to it. As a result, elements from the superficial layers are washed out and 
transport them to the bottom layers. The elements in solution are then precipitated in the deeper 
regions of the tailings dam. This scheme, however, does not hold for the Ra and Pb isotopes. 
These radionuclides are co-precipitated with gypsum and thus immobilized within the tailings. 
They might be eventually migrating as gypsum dissolves, this reaction being kinetically 
controlled. Table-2 shows the concentrations of radionuclides and pH values of the seepage 
water in two different depths of the tailings. 
 
The oxidation zone would correspond to the zone of metal and radionuclide transport (except for 
Ca, 226Ra, and 210Pb) and would be about 1 m downward from the tailings surface. In the 
saturated zone (in which a pH around 6.0 prevails) metals would be precipitated. This region 
would correspond to an accumulation zone. Figure-5 shows these processes in a schematic way. 
 
These findings have an important bearing on the long term impacts of the tailings dam in respect 
to underground waters contamination. The accumulation zone acts as a barrier for metal and 
radionuclides migration. The acidification of these waters will be a slow process and very much 
dependent on:  
i) The kinetics of the residual pyrite oxidation taking place in the upper layers of the 
tailings,  
ii) The amount of acidic waters that may be generated by this process. Some other issues 
may be considered, for instance the residence time of waters in the tailings dam and the 
movement of the oxidation front (which will be related to the consumption of the oxidizing 
material). 
 
5.  Remediation Strategy 
 
Methods of construction and design that are harmonious with and emulate nature are preferable 
to engineered designs that are built to resist, rather than to harness natural processes for long 
term stability. Notwithstanding the above considerations a pragmatic approach to the problem 
can be proposed. If it is accepted that metal and radionuclide mobility will be dependent on 
pyrite oxidation, controlling this process would be the key issue in the remediation strategy to be 
proposed. 
 
This can be achieved by means of preventing oxygen diffusion into the tailings. The most 
practical way to do so is by covering the tailings with a material that shows a low oxygen 
diffusion coefficient. In this way, pyrite oxidation would be prevented and the seepage water 
would remain at a pH that would favour the precipitation of the contaminants. The cover would 
also have an essential role in reducing water infiltration, although this would not be the major 
objective. 
174 
 
Table: 2 Physical-chemical characteristics of pore water in the tailings dam, values in brackets 
indicate ranges. 
 
 
 
Figure.5. Conceptual model of the geochemical processes taking place at the tailings dam. 
175 
 
Covering would also be effective in reducing radon exhalation from the tailings and shield 
gamma rays. If radon exhalation would not be a major issue in terms of environmental 
concentration increases of the gas, it may be of concern in case of intrusion and building 
developments on the tailings surface. A most probable scenario would include house 
construction by poor people that may find the area an attractive place for housing. 
 
The long-term efficiency of final covers is of major concern when designing final covers for 
uranium mill tailings impoundments. 
 
In general terms, a complete evaluation of final covers for the closure of uranium mining and 
milling tailings impoundments should take into account both geotechnical and geochemical 
aspects (which have been described above). 
 
In turn, geotechnical investigations are concerned with the capacity of the systems to minimize 
water and oxygen percolation into the bulk of tailings. In addition, the effectiveness of the gas 
barrier layer of the covers to reduce radon exhalation towards the atmosphere has to be 
considered. In this regard, the geotechnical investigations comprise  
 
(i) Water balance analyses;  
(ii) Assessment of the saturated and unsaturated flux of water through final covers; and  
(iii) Evaluation of radon flux attenuation across the gas barrier layer. 
 
6.  Performance assessment 
 
Performance assessment normally includes the verification of compliance with applicable 
regulations, as well as site specific performance objectives. A performance assessment also 
provides a tool for the optimization of remediation measures and the identification of 
shortcomings in design, operating procedures and management systems. These assessments 
cover radiological and non-radiological, as well as conventional geotechnical aspects. 
 
As the design and operation of many tailings facilities relies on assumptions and models, 
performance assessment supplies information that is useful in the verification and calibration of 
these assumptions and models. Future research and development priorities can be identified on 
the basis of deficiencies within a design or system thus assessed. 
 
Two basic approaches exist, risk-based assessment and design-based assessment. The actual 
approach adopted for a performance assessment will depend on the conceptual starting point, site 
specific parameters, as well as possible requirements by the licensing authorities. 
 
Conclusions 
 
It can be observed that the technologies for the disposal of tailings from uranium milling have 
reached a certain maturity. There remains, however, some uncertainty over the long term 
performance of impoundments. Such uncertainty is not unique to tailings impoundments, but 
inherent in all engineered structures on the surface of the Earth. The long term performance of 
below ground disposal facilities appears to be more predictable. 
 
176 
 
The uncertainties stem largely from uncertainties in the design base, such as the long term 
development of climatological parameters, or from random events, such as human intrusion 
scenarios. This document discusses various strategies to counteract these uncertainties, but 
focuses on technical means. 
 
Tailings themselves pose to major challenges to ensure their long term stability: controlled 
consolidation and minimization of the ensuent release of contaminants. Dewatering of tailings is 
a major technological effort, but for newly generated tailings standard technologies exist, e.g. 
paste technology. The situation is different for legacy sites. Consolidation and solidification 
technologies are still in the development stage and this document discusses a few examples that 
are promising. Such solidification technologies will also help to keep the potential source term 
for contaminants low, if the physical barriers are breached. 
 
The successful stabilization of legacy sites faces a variety of transitory challenges, for instance 
wind or water induced erosion problems before any cover providing for long term stability is 
fully operational. This report describes methods to reduce the effects of erosion. 
 
However, as technical solutions alone are likely not sufficient to ensure long term stability, some 
form of institutional control may be needed. This document demonstrates the usefulness of an 
integrated approach, involving risk assessment, technical and management measures, as well as 
stakeholder participation. 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
I would like to express my sincere gratitude to my professor Dr. Govind Singh Bhardwaj for 
their guidance, continued interest and inspiration throughout the course of this work. I shall 
remain indebted to my parents and rest of the family for their love, care, trust and encouragement 
during the course of my research. 
 
References 
 
International Atomic Energy Agency, “Current practices for the management of uranium mill 
tailings”, IAEA Technical Report Series TR-335, Vienna (1992). 
Jewell, R.J., “A summary of the UNEP workshop on managing the risks of tailings disposal”, in: 
Asher, C.J., Bell, L.C. (Eds.) Workshop on future directions in tailings environmental 
management, 14-15 September 1998, Perth, Australia. Australian Centre for Mining 
Environmental Research, Brisbane (1998). 
US Environmental Protection Agency, Code of Federal Regulations Title 40: Protection of         
the Environment (1996ff.). 
International Atomic Energy Agency, Site Characterization Techniques Used in Environmental 
Restoration, IAEA-TECDOC-1148, Vienna (2000). 
International Atomic Energy Agency, Non-Technical Factors Impacting on the Decision Making 
Processes in Environmental Remediation, IAEA-TECDOC-1279, Vienna (2002). 
OECD-Nuclear Energy Agency / International Atomic Energy Agency, Environmental Issues in 
Uranium Mining and Milling, OECD, Paris, (1999). (A joint report by the OECD Nuclear 
Energy Agency and the International Atomic Energy Agency). 
 
177 
 
OECD-Nuclear Energy Agency / International Atomic Energy Agency,  Environmental 
Remediation of Uranium Production Facilities, OECD, Paris, (2002). (A joint report by the 
OECD Nuclear Energy Agency and the International Atomic Energy Agency). 
Steffen Robertson & Kirsten (BC) INC, Senes Consultants LTD, Melis Consulting Engineers 
LTD, “Canadian uranium waste disposal technology”, National Uranium Tailings Program, 
Energy Mines & Resources Canada, Ottawa (1987). 
US Energy Information Administration, “Decommissioning of US uranium production 
facilities”, US Department of Energy, Energy Information Administration, Office of Coal 
Nuclear Electric and Alternate Fuels, Washington, February 1995. DOE/EIA-0592 (1995). 
Fox, R.W., Kelleher, G.G., Kerr, C.B., “Ranger Uranium Environmental Inquiry”, Australian 
Government Printing Service, Canberra (1977). 
US Department of Energy, “Fact sheet: Grand Junction UMTRA vicinity properties”, US 
Department of Energy (1997). 
Phare, The European Union’s PHARE Programme, (2002) http://europa.eu.int/comm/ 
enlargement/pas/phare/ 
Kraus, W., Ettenhuber, E., Gehrcke, K., Przyborowski, S., “Criteria for the restoration of mining 
residues in Germany”, Internat. Symp. On Restoration of Environments with Radioactive 
Residues, Arlington Virginia 29 November-3 December 1999, International Atomic Energy 
Agency, Paper SM- 359/2.2, Vienna (2000) 201-215. 
Knapp, R.B., Richardson, J.H., Rosenbuerg, N., Smith, D.K., Tompson, A.F.B., Sarnogoev, A., 
Duisebayev, B., Janecky, D., “Radioactive tailings issues in Kyrgyzstan and Kazakhstan”, 
9th Internat. Conf. on Tailings and Mine Waste, Fort Collins, Colorado 27-30 January 2002, 
AA Balkema, Lisse (2002).  
International Atomic Energy Agency, Inturgeo: The International Uranium Geology Information 
System, IAEA-TECDOC-471, Vienna (1988). 
International Atomic Energy Agency, the long term stabilization of uranium mill tailings, iaea, 
Vienna, 2004 
 
178 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
COASTAL ENGINEERING AND ESTUARINE PROCESSES - MUST TECHNOLOGIES 
FOR COASTAL ZONES 
 
 
Ankit Purohit1 and Dr. Govind Singh Bhardwaj2 
 
 
ABSTRACT: The coastal zone is a dynamic area of natural change and of increasing human use. 
They occupy less than 15% of the Earth's land surface; yet accommodate more than 50% of the 
world population. It is estimated that 3.1 billion people live within 200 kilometers from the sea. 
With three-quarters of the world population expected to reside in the coastal zone by 2025, 
human activities originating from this small land area will impose an inordinate amount of 
pressures on the global system. Coastal zones contain rich resources to produce goods and 
services and are home to most commercial and industrial activities. An estuary is a semi-enclosed 
coastal body of water with one or more rivers or streams flowing into it, and with a free 
connection to the open sea. Estuaries are often associated with high rates of biological 
productivity.Present paper deals with the at length review of problems and prospects of the 
coastal zone management for sustainable development.  
 
Keywords:  Coastal Zone, Estuary, Groynes, Gabions, Coast Ranger 
 
1.  Introduction 
 
The present study elaborates about need of the coastal zone and estuary management, which  
focuses into three aspects and whatever data or information available, will be synthesized to 
propose an integrated estuarine and coastal zone management i.e. Protection of our life and 
property in coastal zone against natural disasters, including storm surge and tsunami; Wave, 
current and sediment transport processes in coastal waters; Prediction and evaluation of 
limnological  and estuarine and coastal marine environments, including physical, chemical and 
biological processes;  Restoration and rehabilitation of inland, estuarine and coastal waters. 
(Coastal and oceanographic engineering www.coastal.ufl.edu) . Hazards in coastal areas may be 
assessed, as the coasts become more developed, the vulnerability component of the equation 
increases as there is more value at risk to the hazard. The likelihood component of the equation 
also increases in terms of there being more value on the coast so a higher chance of hazardous 
situation occurring. Fundamentally humans create hazards with their presence. 
 
 
                                                
1B.E. (Mining Engineering) Student, Department of Mining Engineering, CTAE, MPUAT, Udaipur -
313001, INDIA 
2Assistant Professor, Department of Mining Engineering, CTAE, MPUAT, Udaipur -313001, INDIA 
email: bhardwaj_gs@rediffmail.com 
 
179 
 
2.  Need of Coastal Zone and Estuary Management  
    
 Coastal environments are transient, continuously reshaped by the natural processes of the waves, 
tides, surges, erosion and deposition. There is increasing pressure on our coasts from the 
competing needs of commercial, recreational and residential interests. Careful planning and 
comprehensive assessment is required to preserve these complex coastal dynamics and to 
safeguard the coasts for future generations. Global trade means goods handled by ports. Costs 
dictate enhanced operability and capacity. Planning, design and construction of ports and marine 
structures as well as any marine operation require a range of hydraulic and environmental 
engineering services and tools to ensure viable design, safe and efficient operation and minimal 
environmental impact. 
 
Our main focuses are classified into the following three topics, which will be synthesized to 
propose an integrated estuarine and coastal zone management: 
 
• Protection of our life and property in coastal zone against natural disasters, including 
storm surge and tsunami 
• Wave, current and sediment transport processes in coastal waters 
• Prediction and evaluation of limnological, and estuarine and coastal marine 
environments, including physical, chemical and biological processes 
• Restoration and rehabilitation of inland, estuarine and coastal waters. 
 
Key Tasks: 
  Coastal and estuarine engineering involve the following points : 
 
• Coastal structures 
• Water front development 
• Sediment transport and morphology 
• Shoreline and estuary management 
• Coastal flooding and erosion 
• Dredging and spill management 
• Cooling water recirculation 
• Survey and monitoring 
 
Coastal Engineering and Management focuses on the latest techniques and technologies used in 
the design and construction of coastal and marine structures, including seawalls, breakwaters, 
jetties, ports, bulk terminals and waterfront developments. It addresses the most current and 
pertinent challenges including: 
 
• Best Practice Engineering and Construction of Marine Infrastructure 
• Maximizing Operational Excellence of Onshore/Offshore Marine Infrastructure 
• Ensuring Environmental Sustainability and Management of New Projects 
 
Hot Topics which are discussed in this field are: 
• Overview of planned coastal developments throughout the Asian region 
• Understanding the local conditions and environmental challenges affecting the 
construction of coastal structures 
180 
 
• New innovations and techniques used in the design and construction of coastal and 
marine structures 
• Latest trends in technologies and materials for enhanced protection and durability of 
marine structure         
•                                                                   
Some of the areas of this field are: 
 
• Coastal processes analysis  
• Numerical modeling of estuarine hydrodynamics and water quality  
• Numerical modeling of marsh systems and marsh restoration design  
• Evaluation and design of coastal structures and beach nourishment  
• Analysis of tidal inlet dynamics and sediment transport  
• Geotechnical engineering and analysis 
 
3.  Hazards in Coastal Areas 
 
As coasts become more developed, the vulnerability component of the equation increases as there 
is more value at risk to the hazard. The likelihood component of the equation also increases in 
terms of there being more value on the coast so a higher chance of hazardous situation occurring. 
Fundamentally humans create hazards with their presence. In a coastal example, erosion is a 
process that happens naturally on the Canterbury Bight as a part of the coastal geomorphology of 
the area and strong long shore currents. This process becomes a hazard when humans interact 
with that coastal environment by developing it and creating value in that area. 
Estuary and Coastal processes and Impacts of Climate Change research, is a newly emerging area 
of sustainability research at the Environment and Infrastructure research group. The research in 
this area combines mathematical modeling of multi-scale processes with behavior -oriented  
geomorphological knowledge of coastal and estuarine systems, focusing on coastal and estuarine 
hydrodynamics, sediment transport, morphology, impacts of global climate change and marine 
renewable energy. The current researches in this area involve: 
 
• Mathematical modeling of morpho dynamic response of coastal and estuarine systems to 
global climate change, using novel modelling techniques 
• Mathematical modeling of long-term morpho dynamic evolution of estuaries 
• Simulation of flow-sediment process interactions in coasts and estuaries 
• Investigation of beach response to extreme storm conditions using statistical modeling 
• modeling morphological impacts of tidal stream turbines 
 
The effects of carrying out any form of intervention on the coast be it a new coastal defence, a 
harbour, a jetty or any development that artificially affects the way natural processes or forces 
interact with the shoreline, requires a detailed examination of such behaviour to confirm that any 
changes that may be introduced by the intervention do not adversely affect the current balance or 
cause changes that will affect the integrity of the shoreline or its ability to provide natural 
protection to the hinterland. 
The starting point for such an examination is the definition of natural processes that have 
historically and which are currently applying at the site. 
Natural processes may be split into two categories. Those that cause change in shoreline features 
and those that constitute the changes that are taking place. 
181 
 
Table 1 indicates Coastal Zone Pressures (coastalwiki.org) 
 
 
 
Examination & analysis of such data can be used to evaluate & predict, using experience allied 
with engineering judgment and up to date techniques, e.g. numerical and physical models, how 
the shoreline may behave under changed circumstances. 
 Evaluation of coastal process behavior is necessary if thorough technical assessments of 
shoreline problems or coastal structure design requirements are to be carried out. However an 
understanding of processes is also necessary if the effects on the environment due to coastal 
changes (natural or manmade) are to be understood and appropriate safeguards implemented to 
protect vulnerable habitats. 
Significant areas of the shoreline of the United Kingdom are internationally, nationally or locally 
designated to be of conservation importance, either in respect of the natural, historic or built 
environment. Furthermore there is specific legislation and directives governing the assessment of 
developments that may affect such areas. There is a duty on Engineers in collaboration with 
Scientists to provide appropriate assessments of the environmental effects of shoreline 
development proposals and to define solutions that provide the optimum balance between the 
technical, environmental and economic criteria applying. 
 
4.  Coastal Erosion Hazards  
 
Coastal erosion is one of the most significant hazards associated with the coast. Not in terms of a 
rare massive release of energy or material resulting in loss of life, as is associated with tsunami 
and cyclones, but in terms of a continual chronic release that forms a threat to infrastructure, 
capital assets and property. 
 Beach erosion process 
Storm induced large erosion events are a part of the natural evolutionary process of fine 
sediment, gently sloping beaches. Increased wave energy in storms leads to the removal of 
foreshore, berm and dune sediments. These displaced sediments are then deposited as near shores 
and bars and act to dampen the wave energy lessoning the amount of sediment that is being 
eroded from the coast. When wave energies decrease post storm events, the sediments from these 
182 
 
newly deposited near shore bars are returned to the upper beach, rebuilding the berm. This self-
correcting cycle is an active balance between wave energies and fine sediment deposition. This 
store of sediment being available for erosion in storms and re-depositing when the event has 
subsided is an important natural buffer mechanism against protecting the mainland from erosion 
and minimizing coastal retreat. 
 Dune destruction 
Sand dunes are very dynamic fragile structures that act as stores of sediment used to carry out the 
coastal processes mentioned above. This removal of the upper beach sediments is important from 
a hazard perspective as this is the area of the coast that is often utilized for property development 
due to the high prices sea front properties with a view can achieve. 
Human impact 
 Human uses of coasts 
A settled coastline in Marblehead, Massachusetts. Once a fishing port, the harbor is now 
dedicated to tourism and pleasure boating. Observe that the sand and rocks have been darkened 
by oil slick up to the high-water line. 
 
 
 
Figure 1 A settled coastline in Marblehead, Massachusetts. Once a fishing port, the harbor is now 
dedicated to tourism and pleasure boating. Observe that the sand and rocks have been darkened 
by oil slick up to the high-water line (March 2006) 
 
 Threats to a coast  
Coasts also face many environmental challenges relating to human-induced impacts. The human 
influence on climate change is thought to be a contributing factor of an accelerated trend in sea 
level rise which threatens coastal habitat. 
Pollution can occur from a number of sources: garbage and industrial debris, the transportation of 
petroleum in tankers, increasing the probability of large oil spills, small oil spills created by large 
and small vessels, which flush bilge water into the ocean. 
Fishing has diminished due to habitat degradation, overfishing, trawling, by catch and climate 
change.  
 
Since the growth of global fishing enterprises after the 1950s, intensive fishing has gone from a 
few concentrated areas to encompass nearly all fisheries. The scraping of the ocean floor in 
bottom dragging is devastating to coral, sponges and other long-lived species that do not recover 
quickly. This destruction alters the functioning of the ecosystem and can permanently alter 
species composition and biodiversity. 
 
183 
 
                                               
 
 
Figure 2: This stretch of coast in Tanzania's capital Dar es Salaam serves as a public waste dump 
( Feb 2008 Wikimedia Commons).  
 
4.1 Conservation 
 
Conservational aspects mainly focused on extraordinary population growth in the 20th century 
that has placed stress on the planet’s ecosystems. There are several techniques by which coastal 
zone management can be done with the sustainability. The constructions techniques are placed on 
top priority are hard engineering techniques and soft engineering techniques (Table 1). Soft 
engineering approaches are less expensive, are more long term, attractive and sustainable as they 
work with natural processes.  There are various techniques, their advantages, disadvantages and 
cost aspects are given in table 2.   
 
5.   Construction Techniques 
 
The following is a catalogue of relevant techniques that could be employed as coastal 
management techniques.  
Hard Engineering methods 
 Groynes 
 Sea walls 
 Revetments 
 Rock armour 
 Gabions 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3 displays Groynes 
184 
 
 Offshore breakwater 
 Cliff stabilization 
 Entrance training walls 
 Floodgates 
 
Soft Engineering methods 
 
 Beach Replenishment 
 Sand dune stabilization 
 Beach drainage 
 Monitoring coastal zones 
 Managed retreat 
Table 1 below shows a range of hard engineering techniques. (www.Internetgeography.net). 
Technique Description Advantage Disadvantage Approximate 
Cost 
Groynes 
 
 
 
Groynes are wooden 
barriers constructed 
at right angles to 
the beach to retain 
material. 
Cheap, retain wide 
sandy beaches and do 
not affect access to 
the beach. 
Beaches to the 
south of the 
defences are 
starved of beach 
material due to 
their affect on long 
shore drift. 
£7000 each 
Sea Walls 
 
 
Sea walls are usually 
built along the front 
of cliffs, often 
to protect 
settlements.. 
Provide excellent 
defence where wave 
energy is high, 
reassures the public 
and long life span. 
Expensive, can 
affect beach 
access, recurved 
sea walls can 
increase the 
erosion of beach 
material. 
£3000-
4000/m 
Reventments 
 
 
Traditionally these 
have been wooden 
slatted barriers 
constructed towards 
the rear of beaches to 
protect the base of 
cliffs.  
Less beach material 
is eroded compared 
to a sea wall. Cheaper 
and less intrusive 
than a sea wall. 
Short life span and 
unsuitable where 
wave energy is 
high. 
£2000/m 
Rock armour / 
boulder barriers 
 
 
These are often large 
boulders placed along 
the base of a cliff to 
absorb energy from 
waves. 
Cheap and efficient Unattractive, 
dangerous access 
to beach, costs 
increase when 
rock is imported. 
£3000/m 
Gabions 
 
This is where rocks 
and boulders are 
encased in wired 
Cheap and efficient. Shorter life span 
than a sea wall. 
Visually 
£100/m 
185 
 
mesh.  unattractive. 
Off-shore 
breakwater 
These are large 
concrete blocks and 
boulders 
located off shore. 
Beaches retain 
natural appearance. 
Difficult to 
maintain, 
unattractive, does 
not protect the 
cliffs directly . 
  
Table 2 shows a range of soft engineering techniques. 
Technique Description Advantage Disadvantage Approximate 
Cost 
Beach nourishment Beaches are 
made higher and 
wider by 
importing sand 
and shingle to an 
area affected by 
longshore drift. 
Cheap, retains the 
natural appearance of 
the beach and preserves 
the natural appearance 
of the beach. 
Off shore 
dredging of 
sand and 
shingle 
increases 
erosion in 
other areas 
replenishment, 
increasing 
costs. 
£20 /cu.m 
Managed retreat 
This is when 
areas of coast are 
allowed to erode. 
This is usually in 
areas where the 
land is of low 
value. 
Managed retreat retains 
the natural balance of 
the coastal system. 
Eroded material 
encourages the 
development of beaches 
and salt marshes. 
People lose 
their 
livelihood e.g. 
farmers. These 
people will 
need to be 
compensated. 
Depends on 
amount of 
compensation 
that needs to 
be paid to 
people 
affected by 
erosion. 
 
 
Conclusions 
 
In many cases the application of hard shoreline protection structures did not meet the 
expectations, because the hard shoreline protection techniques affect the coastal morphology in a 
negative way. 
   This has resulted in the continuous development of other and often innovative coastal 
protection techniques. Sometimes the application  of soft shoreline protection solutions lead to 
better results. However, these 'soft' measures affect the coastal morphology as well. A sustainable 
shore protection solution has to meet various requirements. Not only hydraulic aspects must be 
taken into account. Also the use of the coastal zone in a broader sense must be taken into account.  
   Among other things, environmental issues play an important role in shore protection. A swash 
zone, being a part of the coastal region, constitutes a natural environment inhabited by many 
living organisms. Their importance in coastal ecosystem consists in the active bio-filtration of 
suspended particles, processing of organic matter and the primary production. The entire surf 
zone (including the swash zone, which during storm surges spreads landwards to the dune toe) 
186 
 
acts similarly to a biocatalyst filter in a modern waste water treatment plant. Therefore, artificial 
beaches and dunes are preferred as environmentally “friendly”. 
 
 
             
Figure 4 Coast Ranger - a tool for sustainable shoreline management (halcrow.com) 
 
References 
 
1Hughes Steven A.(1993), Physical Models and Laboratory Techniques in Coastal Engineering 
(Advanced Series on Ocean Engineering).World Scientific Pub Co Inc. 
2Nielsen Peter (2009), Coastal And Estuarine Processes. World Scientific Publishing Company. 
3Villars M.T.,G.A.L. Delvigne (2001),Estuarine Processes. Literature review .Final .  
4Wright Linda L.(2011), Sea Level Rise, Coastal Engineering. Shorelines and Tides. 
5www.estuary-guide.net 
6www.internetgeography.net 
7www.coastal.ufl.edu 
8www.halcrow.com 
9www.wikipedia.org 
10www.coastalwiki.org 
187 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
MAGNETIC AND PETROGRAPHIIC INVESTIGATIONS OF KHAIRMALAIA ANDESITE 
ROCK BODIES,  SOUTH OF CHITTOURGARH, RAJASTHAN. 
 
 
Y.H.Rao1, Dr.G.S.Bhardwaj2, Dr.M.Venkateswarlu3 and Dr.B.Ramalingeswara Rao3 
 
 
ABSTRACT: Magnetic and Petrographic analysis of andesite rocks around Khairmalia shows that 
the magnetite crystals are fresh and are in perfect shape. These crystals are present in sufficient 
quantity i.e. measured as 10 to 20% in various rocks in the area. Thirty oriented fresh rock samples 
were collected from ten suitable sites of the outcropping andesite rock for the present analysis. The 
measured values of the natural remanant magnetization (NRM), magnetic susceptibility (MS) and 
Koenigsberger (Qn) Ratio shows typical variations in their values 0.0584  to  388.3492 A/m, 1.00 x 
10-03 to  9.95 x 10-03 SI  and 1.82 x 1005 to 4.15 x 1005 respectively.  Their limits states that the 
beginning of the Vindhyan Supergroup crustal formation during Palaeoproterozic Period was of the 
oscillating & disturbed type. 
 
Keywords: Vindhyan supergroup, Khairmalia andesites, Petrography, Palaeomagnetism. 
 
 
1.   Introduction: 
 
The Indian shield is characterized by the presence of several non-linear Proterozoic sedimentary 
basins, which are collectively referred as Purana Basins (Soni, et. al.1987). The largest one is the 
Vindhyan basin, and it is the North of Indian shield (Raza, et al. 2009).The Vindhyan basin covers a 
large part of Peninsular India, an area of about 1, 04,000 sq km. The Vindhyan basin (Sankaran, A.V. 
2008) started evolving during the late paleo-proterozoic era with the effusion of khairmalia andesite 
formation and deposition of sedimentation. The mode of occurrence of Vindhyan rocks shows 
unconformable relation with the basement rocks of granitic composition. 
     The western margin of the Vindhyan basin is marked by the presence of synsedimentary mafic 
volcanics. Among these, the andesitic rocks described as Khairmalia andesites, khardeola sandstone 
and simultaneous generation of dolerite appears to be of same orogenic activity as evident by the 
field relations and geological setting. 
                                               
1 M.R. Engg College for Women, Hyderabad. yhrao23@gmail.com. 
2 Dept. of Mining, College of Tech. and Engg., M.P.U.A.T., Udaipur.  
Email: bhardwaj_gs@rediffmail.com 
3 National Geophysical Research Institute,Uppal Road, Hyderabad. 
 
188 
 
     The margins of the Vindhyan basin are very much disturbed due to the oscillating nature of basin 
conditions affected by reactivation of fundamental fractures, which resulting ultimately in the Great 
Boundary Fault towards the close of the Vindhyan sedimentation (Prasad, B. 1984). 
     Khairmalia Andesite rock occurring over the Berach granite is a synsedimentational with the 
khardeola sandstone and locally conglomerate also present. The Khairmalia andesite is exposed 
South and North West of Khairmalia near road side and it is continuing towards North. Nearly 5 km 
strike length of andesitic body has been sampled shows little variation in color of the rock. Thickness 
also varies 25 to 75 meters. The unconformity is marked by amygdaloidal andesitic flows, 
conglomeratic bed, and difference in grade of metamorphism. It is maintaining continuity and 
parallelism with adjoining rock formations. The generalized Stratigraphic sequence of Vindhyan 
basin in Chittorgarh is given in (Table 1). 
 
Table 1. Generalised Stratigraphic Sequence of West of Vindhyan Basin in Chittorgarh Area. 
 
WEST VINDHYAN BASIN CHITTORGARH 
SUPERGROUP CHITTORGARH-BUNDI AREA 
  Group Formation Thickness(m) 
 
 
 
BHANDER 
       Deccan Trap 
 - - Unconformity - - 
 
REWA   
 
 
UPPER 
VINDHYANS 
   
 KAIMUR- 
QUARTIZITIC 
SANDSTONE 
  
 
V 
I 
D 
H 
Y 
A 
N 
S  
 
 
LOWER 
VINDHYANS 
 
 
 
SEMRI 
Suket shale 
Nimbahera Limestone 
Nimbahera shale 
Khorip-Malani 
sandstone 
Binota shale 
Sawa grit 
Bhagwanpura limestone 
Khardeola 
sandstone/grit 
Khairmalia andesite 
 
---Unconformity--- 
165 
150 
60 
50 
160 
150 
250 
160 
70 
Archean   Pre-Aravallis  
 
 
189 
 
2.  Geological Set-Up of Khairmalia Andesite 
 
The basement for the Vindhyan rocks are pre-Aravalli rocks, referred to as the Bhilwara Supergroup, 
which comprise shale, slate and phyllite intercalated with dolomite / limestone and quartzite. The 
contact between two sequences (Ray, J.S. et al. 2003) is that of distinct composite unconformity 
marked by Khairmalia amygdaloidal Andesite, Khardeola Conglomerate or Bhagwanpura 
Conglomerate or by a mega-lineament called Great Boundary Fault (GBF). The Vindhyan 
sedimentation started with Khairmalia volcanic activity. The lower part of the Basal Satola Group:-  
a) Khairmalia Andesite and pyroclastics, b) Khardeola and Kanoj Sandstone and shale (Raza, M. et 
al. 2002) which represents the coastal facies, and the upper part of this group Bhagwanpura limestone 
with conglomerate represents the tidal flat deposits. The basement rocks, earlier included into the 
Aravalli system are found to be the part of the pre-Aaravalli sequence and are named now “Bhilwara 
Supergroup”. The age of the base of the Vindhyan is obtained from the radiometric age of 
Khairmalia Andesite (1250 m.y.) and the species of stromatolites (Carmicheal, C.M. 1961) found in 
the Bhagwanpura Limestone which indicate Lower to Middle Riphean age (1000 m.y. to 1300 m.y.) 
also making the unconformity (Prasad B 1984). 
 
The“Khairmalia flow” referred by Heron as “Khairmalia amygdaloid” within the Aaravalli System, 
is as mentioned, found to be at the base of Vindhyan and the andesitic rock composition on 
petrographic studies and as such the formation has been named as “Khairmalia Andesite” with 
pyroclastic / tuffs as member. This overlies unconformable of the Berach Granite or the pre-Aaravalli 
slate and is synsedimentational with the succeeding Khardeola Sandstone. The representative of 
Khairmalia Andesite near Kanauj is a tuff which is succeeded by kanauj Sandstone. Such tuffaceous 
rock is also found at the base Bhagwanpura formation on west of Chittaurgarh on the southern side of 
river Berach. The Khairmalia volcanics, through patchy due to basement irregularities, are having 
distinct lithology. They represent a significantly major break, indicating disturbances and fissure 
effusion along a deep seated ancient fracture. The Khairmalia Andesite, Khardeola Sandstone 
including Kanauj Sandstone and Bhagwanpura Limestone have been grouped into Satola (24023’ ; 
74033’) Group after the village Satola, where they have well developed. 
 
2.1 Khairmalia Andesite 
 
The Khairmalia intermediate amygdaloidal andesitic flows including pyroclastics occur 
unconformably over the Berach Granite (Bundelkhand Geneiss) or in a few places over the pre-
Aaravalli metamorphites, grouped into Bhilwara Supergroup (Heron’s Aaravalli) and have an inter-
beds of quartzitic sandstone. The flows are well exposed between Uthail (24032’ ; 74051’ ) and  
Khairmalia (24029’ ; 74022’), east of  Katai - Madhopur (24027’ ; 74032’), east of Dholapani (24016’ ; 
74041’), around Patia-Untakhera (24013’ ; 74058’) and further south-west of Jambuwella (24009’ ; 
74032’). 
 
The flows are about 40 m thick near Khairmalia, but are over 100 m in thickness further south in 
Untakhera – Madhuratalab (24013’ ; 74040’) area. Between Ratanpura (24031’; 74031’) and Pindri 
(24030’ ; 74031’) about 15 m thick pyroclastics including tuffs are seen in the lower part of the flows. 
190 
 
The tuffaceous rocks are also seen 1.5 km south-east of Kanauj (24045’;74032’) and south of Dhanet 
(24053’ ; 76036’) on southern bank of river Berach. The individual flows are 2 – 12 m thick with 
amygdaloidal tops, varying from a few cm to 5 m in thickness. The number flows seen in any section 
is variable. There are 9 flows near Khairmalia, 20 flows east of Katai-Madhopur and further south, 
and thus there is a general thickening towards south. 
 
The Khairmalia andesitic rock is mainly fine grained and dark purple, pink, greenish and greenish 
brown in colour. It is, when fresh, hard and break with a subconchoidal fracture. Its Sp. Gravity 
ranges from 2.65 to 2.80. Amygdales are generally circular or ellipsoidal, ranging in size from mm to 
cm and filled with a dark green silicate-chloritic mineral, calcite, siderite, chert or quartz ;(a) quartz 
around amygdales of chlorite,(b) pyrite around amygdales of quartz,(c) siderite around amygdales of 
calcite are seen. Specks of chalcopyrite and encrustation of malachite have also been noticed. The 
pyroclastics are dirty green to brown, fine to coarse-grained and compact, often showing indistinct or 
crude stratification. Just south-west of Pindri, greenish andesitic rocks are followed downwards by a 
metre or so tuffaceous rock resting on pink medium grained Berach Granite occupying the bottom 
parts. The rock is mainly an andesite but varies to trachy-andesite or basaltic-andesite at places 
(Prasad B. 1984). 
 
   
 
The Khairmalia andesitic flows mark the western edge of the Vindhyan basin and their generation 
must be related with the basin tectonics responsible for initiation of Vindhyan sedimentation and 
reactivation of associated basement fractures at the margin. Some evidence in this respect may also 
be found in its association for a major part with the Berach granite. The Khairmalia andesite has been 
dated to be Ca, 1250 m.y. by Crawford as per the personal communication to Sri C.S. Raja Rao 
(Crawford, A.R. et al. 1970) 
 
3.  Methodology 
The study area is located nearby Chhotisadri, which is the South of Chittorgarh, Rajasthan. The field 
work (Fig. 1 & 2) carried out and thirty oriented block samples were collected from ten sites as 
191 
 
shown in the Geological map (Fig. 3) for magnetic & petrographic studies. The exact study area & 
location belongs to the GSI toposheets of bearing the Nos. 45L/10 & 45L/11 are shown in (Fig. 4) 
The Khairmalia andesite flows are well exposed near Khairmalia village which is continuous 
northward and tending north westerly occurring near Pindri village, further continue up to the 
Ratanpur village. Near Ratanpur some displacement of nearly 700 m is observed in the andesitic 
flows, and from this part of the study area flows trend became changed i.e. almost north or north 
easterly which is traceable west of Uthail and continuing up to Untelkhera.  
 
 
                       
 
      Figure 1 Andesite outcrops             Figure 2 In-situ oriented marked block samples                                                                                          
 
 
The oriented block samples were made as standard specimens (25mm dia X 22mm length) for 
laboratory measurements (Fig. 9) and thin sections were prepared for petrographic analysis (Fig. 8). 
The magnetic studies (Radhakrishnamurthy et al 1974) are carried out by measuring the intensities of 
NRM and susceptibility measurements by using the Molspine Magnetometer and Susceptibility 
Meter respectively. The petrographic studies are carried out under the refraction and reflection 
microscopes. All along the andesitic bodies exposed, traverse has been taken and the oriented 
samples were collected. The characteristic particulars of the samples are shown in the (Table 2) 
                                                                
Table 2.  Shows the sample location & characteristic particulars of the andesite rock oriented block 
samples which were collected. 
 
Sample Location Characteristics 
South of Khairmalia Brownish coloured, flows bands visible, amygdaloid present 
North of Khairmalia Light brownish, flow bands visible, amygdaloid present 
Near Pindri village area Yellowish tinge, amygdaloid little filled with minerals  
Near Ratanpur village area Greenish to brownish in coloured. 
Unthelkhera Greenish to brownish in coloured. More weathered. 
 
192 
 
3.  Magnetic Analysis 
The magnetic analysis is carried out to find the magnitude (intensity) of the natural and induced 
magnetization. Three parameters: NRM intensity, Susceptibility and Qn-ratio were measured and the 
variations in values of Site-wise maxima and minima are given in the (Table 3). For all these 
parameters histograms are shown by the (Fig. 5, 6 and 7).  Natural Remanent Magnetic (NRM) 
intensity was measured for all specimens on Molespin Spinner Magnetometer. The values are varies 
from  0.0584  to 388.3492 A/m as shown in the (Fig. 5). The variation in the values is an indicative 
of geological disturbances i.e. oscillating nature at the beginning of Vindhyan sedimentation as well 
as configuration of the Vindhyan basin during synsedimentational andesitic flows. The Magnetic 
Susceptibility (MS) was measured for all specimens on Kappa Bridge System. The values are varies 
from 1.00 x 10-03 to  9.95 x 10-03 SI units as shown in (Fig. 6). These values of MS further supports 
the inferences drawn by NRM.    The Koenigsberger Ratio (Qn), which is the ratio of natural and 
induced magnetic intensities has been computed by using the measured intensity and susceptibility 
values for all specimens by assuming a value of 0.05 mT for the inducing field that is equivalent to 
that of the Earth’s magnetic field value. The computed value varies from 1.82 x 1005 to 4.15 x 1005 as 
shown in the (Fig. 7). As the values shows > 1, indicates that the samples are good enough to suitable 
for palaeomagnetic investigations 
   
 
Table 3. Shows min & max of Site-wise values Intensity, Susceptibility and Qn ratio. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
              
 
 
 
 
Site N n Intensity Susceptibility Qn Ratio 
   Min Max Min Max Min Max 
S1 2 20 4.3046 388.3492 1.43E-03 9.55E-03 9.01E+02 3.23E+05 
S2 2 18 59.4612 352.1291 1.03E-03 2.26E-03 1.04E+05 3.33E+05 
S3 3 25 0.0584 255.3213 1.08E-03 8.43E-03 1.82E+01 3.13E+05 
S4 4 23 0.1251 43.0141 1.10E-03 9.93E-03 2.54E+01 3.27E+04 
S5 2 21 2.3844 89.816 3.48E-03 9.19E-03 9.65E+02 1.95E+04 
S6 3 24 49.925 112.99 1.03E-03 9.95E-03 1.29E+04 1.26E+05 
S7 3 16 32.0401 376.2089 1.01E-03 9.64E-03 1.25E+04 4.15E+05 
S8 3 21 1.4038 72.4506 1.00E-03 9.74E-03 4.65E+02 1.41E+05 
S9 3 21 2.275 78.0524 1.14E-03 9.45E-03 6.13E+02 1.30E+05 
S10 3 20 5.1838 161.1641 1.03E-03 9.87E-03 1.69E+03 2.48E+05 
Min / Max 0.0584 388.3492 1.00E-03 9.95E-03 1.82E+01 4.15E+05 
193 
 
 
           
  
    
  
 
 
                                 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.   Petrography 
 
Khairmalia andesite is showing well preserved amygdaloid structure and pisolitic structure evident of 
volcanicity (Balasubrahmanyan M.N., 2006). Andesite generally described as the surface equivalent 
of diorite. Andesites are of intermediate composition, free from quartz. Quartz is less and 
predominantly occurs in matrix, so mixed with feldspar that they are distinguished only with 
difficulty. Diorite contains more silica than most of the andesites.  The essential minerals of andesite 
are plagioclase and one or more of the mafic minerals, hypersthene, clinopyroxene, hornblende, 
biotite and olivine. 
 
Additional minerals present are little quartz/tridymite/cristobalite, alkali feldspar, glass and minor 
accessories. Typical andesites are almost without exception porphyritic and Kheirmalia andesites also 
shows porphyritic to non porphyritic and ophitic texture.  These may be categorized as basaltic 
andesites on the basis of colour index and composition(Poornachandra Rao, G.V.S., et al. 2004). 
 
The determination of the plagioclase composition by optical means can be determined near 
approximate and in Khairmalia andesites their presence are as phenocrysts crystals are perfect in 
shape, trivial, fresh, not ground, not altered and possible composition can be determined by 
plagioclase grain count per unit volume. 
Figure 7 Histogram showing Qn 
Figure 6 Histogram for magnetic Figure 5 Histogram for NRM 
194 
 
In basaltic andesites the zoning is insignificant and the composition determinable with adequate 
accuracy. In intermediate andesites the plagioclase phenocrysts are most abundant and characteristic. 
The typical characteristic oscillatory zoning exhibits the compositional variation in plagioclase,is not 
present in Khairmalia andesite. In Kheirmalia andesites the plagioclase phenocryst shows freshness, 
uniform composition. The plagioclase present in Kheirmalia andesites are high temperature 
plagioclases. Anhedral in form, mostly rectangular laths mostly albitic composition (0 – 10 %CaAl2 
Si2O8) 2 showing albitic twinning (Moorhouse W.W., 1984). Most of plagioclases crystals are 
twinned following albite lava. Most of the crystals are homogeneous relatively calcic plagioclase 
showing uniform conditions setup of paleo-conditions. According to Tuttle, the stresses associated 
with recrystallization would facilitate the rich development of twinning (Tuttle, O.F., 1952). The 
accurate identification of the plagioclases is perhaps the most valuable single determination. 
Index of refraction in thin sections is sodic plagioclases upto An 20, have an index less than that of 
Canada Balsam. Pyroxene is also present as ferromagnetism constituent of andesite. Orthopyroxene 
i.e.generally hypersthene & clinopyroxene i.e. dliopside & pigeonite, are both present in andesites ( 
Fig. 8). 
 
                    
 
 
 
                
                          
 
                                    
 
 
 
 
 
        
                                              
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
Fig. 8  Magnetite crystals (Black) under the microscope (Magnification 10X) in khairamalia 
 
 
A
C D
B
195 
 
4.1 Significance of this Litho Unit in Paleomagnetic Aspects 
  
Most of the great volcanic chains of the world are the places of occurrences of andesites including 
the cascade volcanoes of the Western United States, the Caribbean, Mexican, and Andean volcanoes, 
the volcanoes of Japan and East Indies, some Mediterranean volcanoes, as well as many other areas 
for recent and former volcanism. The great strato volcanoes are also predominantly andesitic. Field 
Relationship of the Khairmalia andesite, , kardeola sandstone and dolerite, leads to petrography and 
the geological setting shows that the litho units are marker horizons where the paleomagnetic feature 
are well preserved and on the basis of magnetitic (Carmicheal, C.M. 1961)content, it is found 
suitable for paleomagnetic studies (Fig. 9).  
 
 
 
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9   A. Khairmalia andesite oriented block sample which shows amygdules as spots. B, C and 
D. Standard Specimens (25mm die x 22mm length) for palaeomagnetic studies  which shows various 
colors (Table 2), northward direction arrow in-situ and magnetite minerals respectively. 
 
Conclusions 
 
The preliminary studies shows that the field relationship and regional geological set up is indicative 
of the significance of the rocks from palaeomagnetic study point of view and it may be referred as 
paleomagnetic studies marker horizon. Petrographic investigation identifies mineral assemblages rich 
A B
DC
196 
 
in iron and mineral magnetite is identified as main magnetic mineral under reflecting light 
investigation. It is further confirmed by magnetic analysis viz. NRM, MS and Qn Ratio. 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
The authors are thankful to the Director, NGRI, Hyderabad, for providing core drilling and 
laboratory facility for further investigations. Authors are also thankful to Shri S.K. Minda, Geologist, 
DMG, Udaipur, for sparing his valuable time and helping in field work
.  
References 
 
Balasubrahmanyan M.N. (2006) International Association for Gondwana Research, Memoir  
No. 9, pp.114-115 
Balmiki Prashad (1984) Geological Survey of India Memoirs, Vol.116 (Parts I) Geology, 
sedimentation and palaeogeography of the Vindhyan Supergroup, Southeastern Rajasthan. 
pp. 21-24. 
Carmichael, C.M., (1961) The magnetic properties of ilmenite-haematite crystals. 
Proc.Roy.Soc.London, v, A-263, pp. 508-530. 
Crawford, A.R. and Compston, W., (1970). The age of the Vindhyan System of peninsular India. 
Quart.Jour. Geol. Soc. London, v. 125, pp. 351- 371. 
Moorhouse, W.W. (1984) The study of rocks in thin sections. CBS publishers, Delhi. pp.195-200  
Poornachandra Rao, G.V.S., et al. (2004). Magnetic, Petrographic and Geochemical characteristics of 
khairmalia andesites(Semri Group), Vindhyan Supergroup. Journl of Applied Geochemistry, 
v. 6 No.2, pp. 198-212. 
Radhakrishnamurthy, C. and Deutsch, E.R., (1974). Magnetic techniques for ascertaining the nature 
of iron oxide grains in basalts. Jour. Geophys., v. 40, pp. 453-465. 
Ray,J.S.Veizer, J. and Davis, W.J., (2003). C, O, Sr and Pb isotope  systematic of carbonate 
sequences of the Vindhyan Supergroup, India: age, diagenesis, correlations and implications 
for global events. Precamb. Res., v.121, pp.103-140 
Raza, M., Abdullah Khan and M. Shamim Khan (2009) Origin of Late Palaeoproterozoic Great 
Vindhyan basin of North Indian shield: Geochemical evidence from mafic volcanic rocks. 
Journal of Asian Earth Sciences, v. 34, pp. 716-730  
Raza, M., Casshyap, S.M. and Khan, A. (2002) Geochemistry of Mesoproterozoic Lower Vindhyan 
shales from Chittorgarh, southeastern Rajasthan and its bearing on source rock compositions 
and tectonosedimentary environments. Jour. Geol. Soc. India,  
v. 60, pp. 505-518 
Sankaran, A. V. (2008)  The debate on the age of Lower Vindhyans and the beginnings of    complex 
life forms,  Current 436 Science, v. 94, No. 4, 25 February 2008, pp..436-437 
Soni, M.K., Chakraborty, S., and Jain, V.K. (1987) Vindhyan Supergroup – A Review. In 
B.P.Radhakrishna, Ed., Purana Basins of Peninsular India( Middle to Late Proterozoic), 
Memoir, Geol, Soc., India, Bangalore, No. 6, pp. 87-138 
Tuttle O.F. (1952) Variation of optical properties with albite content in Alakali feldspar .  
Ass Jourl. Sci., Bouron v. pp. 553-567. 
197 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
INVESTIGATION OF THE EFFECTS OF ROAD ACCIDENTS ON TRAFFIC 
PERFORMANCE USING MICRO-SIMULATION 
 
 
         Md. Mahmud Hasan1 and  Shamas Bajwa2 
 
 
ABSTRACT: Road accidents hinder normal traffic movements on the roadway and can even 
cause severe congestion on the roadway for a significant duration. This paper investigates the 
impacts of road accidents on traffic performance using micro-simulation. It also analyses one 
scheme to mitigate the congestion caused by road accidents. For this study, about 18 km long 
section of Eastern Freeway in Melbourne, Australia is selected. Traffic parameters; speed is  
considered as a measurement of traffic condition on the roadway. Dataset includes 5 minute 
interval traffic flow and speed data along with accidents information data for the four years, from 
2007 to 2010, has been  used for analysis. To analyse the effect of road accidents on traffic 
condition, micro-simulation is used to replicate the real-world situation of the roadway before 
and after the accident has been occurred. One congestion mitigation strategy called ramp 
metering has been tested in this study. Outcomes of the study will aid to mitigate the congestion 
caused by the accidents and provide a safer travelling environment on the freeway. 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Road accidents hinder normal traffic movements on the roadway. Due to accident, few of the 
lanes or even total road sections are blocked. It can be a cause of severe congestion on the 
roadway for a significant duration.This study investigates the impacts of road accident on traffic 
performance and analyses one scheme to mitigate the congestion caused by road accidents. For 
this purpose, micro-simulation is used to replicate the real-world situation of the roadway before 
and after the accident has been occurred. Traffic parameter such as speed is selected for 
congestion measuring indication whilst ramp metering strategy is considered as a mitigation 
scheme of the congestion due to accident. 
The remaining paper is organised according to the following sections. Section 2 reviews the 
relevant literature while section 3 and 4 describes the selected roadway and data. The features of 
micro-simulation with calibration and validation process are explained in section 5 and then in 
section 6, evaluation of the scenario of the traffic condition during accident is described. The next 
section depicts the mitigation scheme adopted in this study followed by detailed  result analysis. 
                                                        
1Student (Masters by Research) , School of Civil, Environmental and Chemical Engineering, RMIT 
University, Melbourne, Australia.   mdmahmud_hasan@student.rmit.edu.au  
2Lecturer, School of Civil, Environmental and Chemical Engineering, RMIT University, Melbourne, 
Australia.   shamas.bajwa@rmit.edu.au  
 
198 
 
2. Literature Review 
 
Previous studies mostly emphasised on the significant relation between road accidents and 
congestion. Schrage (2006) mentioned that road accidents hamper normal traffic movements on 
the roadway and obstruction caused by accidents can even trigger traffic congestion for a 
significant duration. One of the studies done by Ikhrata and Michell (1997) showed that road 
accidents cause 25% of congestion in roadways. 
Congestion has numerous negative impacts on traffic performance and environment.  Luo et al. 
(2007) explained that traffic congestion lead to extended travel time, excessive fuel consumption 
and environmental pollution.  
Congestions caused by road accidents  may have vicious financial consequences. Frequent 
Congestion reduces productivity of an area and threatens the local economy. For example, in 
Australia, traffic congestions are predicted to cost $20 billion per year by 2010 (Hojati et al., 
2011). 
 Although a few  studies mentioned the mitigation scheme of traffic congestion , still there is a 
dearth of research on that very topic. 
 
 
3. Test Bed 
 
For this study, Eastern Freeway of Melbourne (Australia), one of the important urban freeways 
for commuting to city from eastern part of Melbourne, is selected as a case study. The selected  
section is approximately 18 km long, starting from Hoddle Street to Springvale road and it 
consists of three to five lanes in each direction. Between entry and exit points of the freeway, 
there are 7 off- ramps and 8 on-ramps in inbound direction and there are 8 off- ramps and 8 on- 
ramps in the outbound direction. The following figure depicts the selected freeway section. 
  
 
Figure 1 Illustration of selected site: Eastern Freeway in Melbourne (Australia) 
 
 
4. Data Issues 
 
To investigate the effect of road accidents on traffic movements, it is necessary to have traffic 
parameters data and crash data. In this case, speed data are taken as traffic parameter data and 
detailed information of each  accidents i.e. accident location, start time, duration etc. are included 
in crash data. As traffic flow data may have same value for congested and free-flow condition, it 
199 
 
is not considered in this study.  The required dataset are collected from VicRoads, the road 
authority of Victoria in Australia.  
 
 
5. Simulation Study 
 
For simulating the real situation of the traffic condition in the freeway, Aimsun simulation 
software version 6.0 is used in this study. Traffic parameter; speed is used in this paper to 
investigate the situation of the traffic performance before and after accident.  
    To relate the simulation with real field situation, it is essential to calibrate and validate the 
simulation output data with the actual data. Here, single accident situation for each direction of 
the freeway are taken as case studies. For outbound direction, accident occurred at 3:00 p.m. on 
the section number 14 in 29.10.2009 is considered while accident happened at 6:15 p.m. on the 
section number 16 in 31.05.2010 is taken for inbound direction. 
 
5.1. Calibration of the simulated value 
 
Calibration of the simulation data is conducted by comparing the actual speed data before 
accident situation with the simulated speed data for the same time. For this purpose, one hour 
speed data of the accident section is considered. The following figures show the results of the 
calibration. It is observed that the simulated speed values are  nearly represents the actual speed 
values. Apart from few cases, it is almost within the acceptable range of 5% error. 
 
          
   (i) outbound section                           (ii)  inbound section 
Figure 2  Comparison of the simulated speed with actual speed before accident 
                                 
5.2. Validation of the simulated value 
 
Validation of the simulated data is done by comparing the actual speed data of accident location 
just after accident occurrence with the simulated speed data for the same time and location. The 
following figures show the results of the validation. It is observed that the simulated speed values 
are nearly close to  the actual speed values. It is almost within the range of 5% - 10% error, which 
is fairly reasonable. 
15:0014:4514:3014:1514:00
105
100
95
90
85
15:0014:4514:3014:1514:00
105
100
95
90
85
Simulation speed
Time
Actual speed
18:0017:4517:3017:1517:00
100
90
80
70
18:0017:4517:3017:1517:00
100
90
80
70
Simulation speed
Time
Actual speed
200 
 
 
 
                      (i) outbound section      (ii)  inbound section  
Figure 3  Comparison of the simulated speed with actual speed at accident duration 
 
 
6. Road Accident And Traffic Condition 
 
To investigate   traffic condition at the time of before and after accident, simulated speed data of 
the sections nearer to the accident location is taken.  
 
6.1. Outbound section: traffic condition (before and after accident) 
 
In context of outbound section, it is observed that after accident, traffic speed at upstream 
sections of accident location are minimised significantly; in few cases it is stop and go situation. 
But before accident, those sections had nearly free-flow speed value. So, this means accident 
causes congestion for a significant time at upstream locations. 
 
a. Before accident                  b.   After accident 
 
Figure 4  Speed vs. time diagram of the outbound sections near accident occurred 
 
16:3016:0015:3015:00
100
80
60
40
20
16:3016:0015:3015:00
100
80
60
40
20
Simulation speed
Time
Actual speed
19:1019:0018:5018:4018:3018:20
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
19:1019:0018:5018:4018:3018:20
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Simulation speed
Time
Actual speed
8:00 PM7:00 PM6:00 PM5:00 PM4:00 PM3:00 PM2:00 PM1:00 PM
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
Time
Sp
ee
d
17
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
section
8:00 PM7:00 PM6:00 PM5:00 PM4:00 PM3:00 PM2:00 PM1:00 PM
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Time
S
pe
ed
17
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
section
(Accident occurred at 3:00 PM on section 14 )
201 
 
6.2  Iutbound section: traffic condition (before and after accident) 
 
In case of inbound section, similar results can be seen while analysing  the speed data of before 
and after accident situation. Before accident, vehicles move on free-flow speed but the scenario 
of traffic is different after accident. Accident results indicate huge congestion on the upstream 
locations while the downstream location is less affected.  
 
 
a. Before accident    b.  After accident 
 
Figure 5  Speed vs. time diagram of the inbound sections near accident occurred 
 
 
7.  Congestion Mitigation Scheme 
 
In this study, one mitigation strategy is to be applied to reduce roadway congestion due to 
accidents. This mitigation strategy is installed while the simulation is running. For this study, 
Ramp metering scheme is applied to decrease the congestion level on the roadway. This is a 
strategy of using the traffic signals at freeway on-ramps to manage the rate of vehicles entering 
the freeway. Although three types of ramp metering is available in Aimsun software: Flow 
metering, green time metering and delay metering, this study only adopts the flow metering 
strategy in order to control the on-ramps flow. 
    Ramp metering scheme is applied in the upstream on-ramps of the accident location at 5 
minutes after accident occurred. The reason for applying ramp metering after 5 minute is that in 
reality, it takes few times to detect accident position and then apply the management scheme. 
And since downstream section has the normal traffic at all times regardless of accident and non-
accident cases, ramp metering is applicable for only upstream section.  
 
7.1 Ramp metering in outbound direction  
 
In the accident case of outbound direction, ramp metering is installed five minutes after the 
accident occurrence and is removed after 15 minutes of accident clearance time. So, this strategy 
applied for two hours in the upstream on-ramps. Since the accident occurred on section number 
14, the scheme of metering is installed two available upstream on-ramps. 
21:0020:0019:0018:0017:00
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Time
Sp
ee
d
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
section
21:0020:0019:0018:0017:00
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Time 
Sp
ee
d
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
section
(Accident occurred at 18:15 PM on section 16)
202 
 
It is observed from the following figure that speed values in the upstream section of the accident 
location are different from that of figure 4(b).  Although few sections still have congestion, they 
are for lesser duration.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6 :Speed vs. time diagram of the outbound sections after applying ramp metering scheme 
 
7.2 Ramp metering in inbound direction 
 
In the context of outbound direction, ramp metering is applied after five minutes of the accident 
occurrence and is removed after 15 minutes of accident clearance time. Thus, this strategy 
installed for one hour in the upstream on-ramps. Since the accident occurred on section number 
16, the scheme of metering is installed in five available upstream on-ramps. 
    It is seen from figure 7 that speed values in the upstream section of the accident location are 
different from that of figure 5(b). Two sections have congestion, yet these are not for longer 
duration.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7: Speed vs. time diagram of the inbound sections after applying ramp metering scheme 
 
 
 
 
8:00 PM7:00 PM6:00 PM5:00 PM4:00 PM3:00 PM2:00 PM1:00 PM
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
Time
Sp
ee
d
17
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
Sec tion
(Accident at 3:00 PM on detector 14)
Ramp metering at upstream on-ramps (3:05pm -5:00pm)
21 :0 020 :0019 : 0018 : 0017 : 00
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Tim e
Sp
ee
d
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
S ec tio n
(A c c id e n t a t 1 8 : 15  P M  o n  de te c to r  1 6 )
R a m p  m e te r ing  a t up s tr e a m  o n - r a m ps  (6 : 2 0  pm -7 : 20  pm )
203 
 
8. Discussion on Results 
 
Roadway accidents can alter the traffic condition within few minutes. It is observed from the 
Figure 4 and 5 that vehicle speed slumps to lower value at an instant time  due to accident. Thus 
traffic condition  is changed considerably from free-flow condition to congested flow. It is 
noticed that accidents cannot affect the traffic performance at downstream location. But a good 
number of upstream sections are affected by accident and this number increases with the duration 
of  clearance  time.                                                                                                                       
 Flow control based ramp metering is applied in this study to control the flow rate of the 
upstream on-ramps. In the simulation stage, flow metering on the on-ramps are applied such a 
manner that only 60% of the actual traffic can enter the freeway. By trial and error , it is found 
that this level of control achieves  better outcomes. If the traffic flow rate are higher, the 
congestion duration is increased in the freeway. However, if flow rate of the on-ramps are 
controlled more than that percentage, there will be huge congestion on the on-ramps which is not 
reasonable  in  real  situation.                                                                                                         
 It is understandable from the figure 6 and 7 that ramp metering strategy can have the 
capability to alleviate traffic congestion. Both figure depict that if the upstream on-ramps are 
metered after accident situation, traffic movement scenario is better than the non-metering 
condition. It is apparent that congestion duration is reduced for all of the affected sections;  
congestion starts after a long duration of time and sustains for a few minutes. In addition, it is 
noticed that except these nearest upstream sections of accident occurrence, traffic movement is 
nearly in the free-flow condition.                                                                                                      
 
Conclusion 
This study analyses how the traffic performance are affected due to  the congestion created by the 
accident by using micro-simulation. Above all, it represents a mitigation scheme which can be a 
realistic  solution for reducing the congestion occurred by accidents 
    The central focus of this paper is the substantial impacts on traffic parameter  caused by road 
accidents, such as vehicle speed in the nearest upstream and accident location in freeway. 
Additionally it is also investigated that  ramp metering scheme has the capability to reduce the 
congestion on the freeway.  
    Outcomes of this study will assist to alleviate the congestion caused by the accidents and 
provide a safer traveling experience/ traffic environment  on the freeway. This study can be 
extended by using automated system for detecting accident and congestion  and installing  
mitigation scheme. Moreover,  future research can also be aimed to analyse the adequacy of 
research outcomes of this study on other road types . 
 
 
References  
 
Ikhrata,  H.  & Michell,  P.  (1997).  Technical  Report of Southern  California  Association  of         
Governments  Transportation   Performance  Indicators.  Transportation   Research    Record, 
1606(1997), 103-114. 
204 
 
Hojati , A.,T., Charles, P., Ferreira, L., Kabit, M., R. (2011). An analysis of traffic incidents on   
an Australian urban road network. Australasian Transport Research Forum 2011 
Proceedings,  28 - 30 September 2011, Adelaide, Australia. 
Schrage, A. (2006). Traffic Congestion and Accidents. University of Regensburg Working Papers 
in Business, Economics and Management Information Systems 419, University of 
Regensburg, Department of Economics. 
Luo, Q., Juan, Z., Sun, B., Jia, H. (2007). Method Research on Measuring the External Costs of 
Urban Traffic Congestion. Journal of Transportation Systems Engineering and Information 
Technology, 7(5): 9-12. 
 
 
 205 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
ESTIMATING BIO-KINETICS FOR NITROGEN SOURCE OXIDATION PROCESSES 
USING ON-LINE MEASUREMENTS IN ACTIVATED SLUDGE 
 
 
M. A. Hoque1 and V. Aravinthan2 
 
 
ABSTRACT: In-depth understanding of bio-kinetic parameters corresponding to organic and 
inorganic nitrogen oxidation is essential for the improvement of the operation systems of nitrogen 
removal in wastewater treatment plants. Researchers have been trying to unravel carbon and 
nitrogen removal mechanisms in activated sludge for the last two decades by upgrading existing 
bio-kinetic models to make them capable in explaining the real scenario of substrate 
biodegradation processes. In most cases, the nitrification models are found to be calibrated 
assuming constant carbon dioxide transfer rate (CTR) in the model structure, though it is 
inherently a non-linear process which has an impact on the titrimetric modeling. As a 
consequence, a complete two-step nitrification model has been developed recently paying 
attention to organic nitrogen source degradation pathway along with due consideration given for 
non-linear CTR process occurring in activated sludge system. In this paper, it is aimed to estimate 
the nitrification process kinetics for organic nitrogen (urea) and inorganic nitrogen (ammonium) 
where the recently developed two-step nitrification model was calibrated with experimentally 
observed on-line measurements. Tests were performed in simple batch reactor equipped with 
respirometric and titrimetric set-up. For both the urea and ammonium nitrification studies, the 
bio-kinetic model was calibrated using three different calibration approaches: using respirometric 
measurements alone, titrimetric measurements alone and combined respirometric-titrimetric 
measurements. A non-linear technique employing the algorithms in the optimisation toolbox 
included in MATLAB was used during the parameter estimation process. Estimated parameters 
(both the kinetic and stoichiometric) obtained from all three stated combinations (calibration 
approaches) were statistically evaluated and compared for confirming the accuracy of model 
calibration process. Moreover, the relationship between substrate concentration and short-term 
biochemical oxygen demand (BODst) was checked for the verification of the respirometric 
method of the nitrification model. properly. 
 
Keywords: Activated sludge; Confidence interval; Model calibration; Nitrification; Parameter 
estimation; Respirometric and Titrimetric measurements 
 
 
 
                                                        
1Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Shahjalal University of Science and Technology 
(SUST), Sylhet-3114, Bangladesh. aziz_cee@yahoo.com  
2Australian Centre for Sustainable Catchments, University of Southern Queensland  (USQ), Qld-
4350, Australia. Vasanthadevi.Aravinthan@usq.edu.au 
 206 
1. Introduction 
 
Nitrification is an important part of activated sludge treatment process where organic nitrogen is 
hydrolyzed first to form ammonium- nitrogen (NH4-N) followed by a two-step oxidation process 
in presence of autotrophic microorganisms. During the first step, ammonium is oxidized to nitrite 
by Nitrosomonas species. This is followed by the conversion of nitrite to nitrate by Nitrobacter 
species. To achieve a better control and understanding of biological nitrogen removal processes, 
on-line information is needed not only about the NH4-N and NO3-N concentrations but also the 
biokinetic characteristics of the activated sludge (Gernaey et al., 1998). Respirometric method in 
which the oxygen uptake rate (OUR) is derived from dissolved oxygen mass balance in a bio-
culture, has been employed recently as a powerful tool for assessing the bio-kinetics of a system 
since it is directly related to biomass growth and substrate consumption (Spanjers and 
Vanrolleghem, 1995; Petersen et al., 2001; Karahan-Gul et al., 2003). Besides the dissolved 
oxygen consumption, nitrification also has a pH effect because of proton production during the 
processes (Gernaey et al., 1997). As a result, the on-line titrimetric measurements have become 
very popular nowadays to quantify the kinetics of activated sludge process (Yuan and Bogaert, 
2001; Garnaey et al., 2002; Pratt et al., 2003)  
   To unfold the mystery of nitrogen removal mechanisms researchers proposed different 
activated sludge models where on-line respirometric and titrimetric measurements were used for 
model calibration. However, in most cases the inherent nature of dynamic carbon dioxide transfer 
rate (CTR) was ignored to keep the model structure simple. Hoque and Aravinthan, (2011) 
proposed recently a two-step model for urea nitrification considering the non-linear CTR in liquid 
medium where the urea biodegradation pathway was taken into account. In this paper, it is aimed 
to verify the suitability of the two-step nitrification model in explaining the organic (urea) and 
inorganic (ammonium) nitrogen oxidation processes in activated sludge where on-line 
respirometric and titrimetric measurements were used for model calibration and parameter 
estimation.  
 
 
2.  Model for urea nitrification 
 
Hoque and Aravinthan (2011) proposed a two-step nitrification model for urea oxidation where 
the hydrolysis process was taken into account along with the physical-chemical interactions of 
CO2 in the liquid medium to enable a model-based interpretation of both the respirometric and 
titrimetric behavior in an activated sludge system. In this current study, the same nitrification 
model was used for calibration and model parameter estimation. The model includes the 
processes: ammonification, ammonium oxidation, nitrite oxidation, endogenous respiration, 
aqueous CO2 equilibrium and stripping of CO2 (see Table 1 for process matrix). Urea and 
ammonium nitrification were studied separately where both the respirometric and titrimetric 
measurements were taken from batch experiments and used for model calibration. Readers are 
referred to “Symbols and abbreviations” for the description of model parameters.    
 
 
 
 207 
Table 1 Process matrix involved in urea nitrification mode
Process BX  
(g COD) 
NX  
(g N) 
NHS  
(g N) 
2NO
S  
(g N) 
3NO
S  
(g N) 
OS  
(g O2) 
3HCO
S  
(mol) 
2CO
S  
(mol) 
HpS  
(mol) 
Kinetics 
Ammonification  
1  1  
   
28
1   
28
1
  NN Xk .  
NHS Oxidation 
(Nitrification 1) 
1  
 
NBM
A
i
Y

1
1  
 
1
1
AY
  
1
143.3
A
A
Y
Y
  -- 
X8
1
  
17
1
14 A
NBM
Y
pi
  BBA
NHSA
NH
AMAX
t Xf
SK
Se ...).1(
1
1,
/

    
2NO
S Oxidation 
(Nitrification 2) 
1  
 
NBMi  
 
2
1
AY
  
 
2
1
AY
 
2
214.1
A
A
Y
Y
  -- 
X8
1
  
14
piNBM  BBA
NOSA
NO
AMAX
t Xf
SK
Se ...).1(
22
2
2,
/

    
Endogenous 
respiration -1  
 
XINXINBM fii   
  
- )1( XIf  -- 
X
IXf
8
1  piNBM )14/)if-(( NXIXI  BXb .  
Aqueous CO2 
equilibrium -- 
 --   -- 1 -1 1 
3
1
2
1011 HCO
pHpk
CO SkSk
  
CO2 stripping --  --   -- -- 1 -- )( 222
*
COCOCOL SSaK   
 
 208 
3.  Methods 
 
   3.1  Batch study 
 
Figure 1 represents the schematic overview of the activated sludge based titrimetric respirometer 
that was used for the current study. The set-up consists of dissolved oxygen (DO) and pH sensors 
along with a reactor having a capacity of 3.5 L (Hoque et al., 2008). Both pH and DO were 
monitored every 5 seconds interval and pH was controlled at a set point of 7.8 0.03. Data acqui
sition of the analogue signals from the sensors was processed by a personal computer eq
uipped with the Labview software package. Compressed air was supplied for the proper 
aeration in the bioreactor. The sludge was collected from Wetalla Water Reclamation Plant 
(operated by Toowoomba City Council), Australia. The sludge was properly acclimatized with 
test substrate prior to the commencement of the main experiments to allow the microorganisms to 
perform at their maximum capacity. Basic trace nutrient were added to ensure that bacterial 
growth was not limited by their absence. In addition, NaHCO3 was dosed to provide sufficient 
inorganic carbon, to keep the metabolic function of the biomass normal. Separate batch 
experiments for the test substrates (urea and ammonium) were conducted to investigate the 
nitrification mechanism under aerobic conditions. All raw data related to DO and pH was 
processed using a spreadsheet program as prescribed by Gernaey et al. (1998, 2001). OUR was 
calculated based on the procedure explained in Gernaey et al. (2001) using the experimentally 
determined value for the oxygen transfer coefficient (KLa). Re-aeration procedure was followed 
to calculate the parameter KLa (ASCE, 1996).  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1 A schematic overview of titrimetric respirometer 
pH  
meter 
DO 
meter 
 
J 
A 
D 
B C 
E 
F 
G 
H I 
A : Computer with Lab view software 
B : Compressed Air valve 
C : Air flow meter 
D : Batch Reactor with Activated sludge 
E : Overhead Stirrer 
F : Three-way Solenoid valve for Acid   
   solution 
G : Three-way Solenoid valve for Base  
   solution 
H : Acid solution (0.05 N) 
I : Base solution (0.05 N) 
J :  Peristaltic Pump 
 209 
3.2  Model parameter estimation 
 
For both the urea and ammonium nitrification studies, the nitrification model was calibrated 
using three different calibration approaches: using respirometric measurements alone, titrimetric 
measurements alone and combined respirometric-titrimetric measurements, followed by model 
parameter estimation. A non-linear technique employing the algorithms in the optimisation 
toolbox included in MATLAB (R2007a) was used during the parameter estimation process. 
Minimization of the mean squared error (MSE) between the model and the experimental output 
was calculated as the main criterion for curve fitting. 
   In the case of urea nitrification, the model parameters kN, KSA1, KSA2, MAX,A1, MAX,A2, YA1, YA2 
and  were estimated along with calculation of 95% confidence intervals, while the parameters 
KSA1, KSA2, MAX,A1, MAX,A2, YA1, YA2 and  were estimated during the ammonium nitrification study 
(the parameter kN was excluded since hydrolysis is not relevant with ammonium nitrification). 
The description of model parameters is given under the section “Symbols and abbreviations”. 
   In this study, the parameter fBA was assumed to be 0.3 based on the fact that the heterotrophic 
biomass outweighs autotrophic biomass in subtropical regions (Buck et al., 1996). The ASM 
default values for the parameters b (0.15 day-1), fXI (0.2) and iNXI (0.02 gN/g COD XI) were 
assumed here for the proposed model calibration and parameter estimation. The relationship 
OURend (0) = (1-fXI).b.XB(0) was employed to calculate the initial concentration of biomass, XB(0). 
Total inorganic carbon in the aqueous medium, CT,init was adjusted reasonably for different assays 
to fit the experimental profile with the model one. The initial concentrations of CO2 and HCO3 in 
the reactor were calculated using their relationship with CT,init  (Sin, 2004). The parameter k1 was 
adjusted to 1.5 min-1 for better curve fitting and lies within the range (0.15 to 1.8 min-1 ) noted by 
Stumm and Morgan (1996). During the model calibration, the value for KLaCO2 was calculated as 
0.0728 min-1 from the oxygen transfer coefficient (KLa) using the relationship between their 
diffusivity coefficients (Sperandio and Paul, 1997; Sin and Vanrolleghem, 2007). The parameter 
pK1 was taken as 6.39 (Sperandio and Paul, 1997). In addition, the degree of reduction of the 
biomass (X) and the nitrogen content of the biomass (iNBM) were calculated as 4.2 and 0.083 gN/g 
COD XB respectively based on the biomass formula of CH1.8O0.5N0.2 that was revised later for 
better curve fitting. The default values suggested by Stumm and Morgan (1996) for the 
parameters pKNH4 (9.25) and 2
*
COS (0.017 mmol/L) were assumed during the parameter 
estimation process. 
 
 
4.  Results and discussion 
 
   4.1  Experimental observations 
 
Urea, a common chemical compound that exists particularly in industrial wastewater, was used as 
organic nitrogen source for the investigation of nitrification process, while ammonium was used 
to investigate inorganic nitrogen oxidation in activated sludge system. The activated sludge was 
properly acclimatized with the test substrate prior to the commencement of the main experiments 
to enhance the metabolic functions during the aerobic biodegradation process. A constant pH at 
7.8 ± 0.03 was maintained during the nitrification study. 
   Figure 2(a) represents the oxygen uptake rate (OUR) for the addition of urea (10 mg N/L) to 
activated sludge whereas Figure 2(b) illustrates the OUR for ammonium (11 mg N/L) 
nitrification. In both case studies, the pattern of OURs are found to be similar. The OUR reaches 
 210 
a maximum level immediately after adding the substrate and is followed by a “tail” indicating 
nitrite accumulation in the liquid medium (Brouwer et al., 1998).  
   The titrimetric profiles for urea and ammonium nitrification are presented in Figure 2. Urea 
nitrification initially causes acid addition to the reactor followed by a continuous base addition 
under feast conditions. The theory of urea hydrolysis also confirms the proton consumption 
during the hydrolysis process (Havlin et al.,1999). The substrate urea was often treated as a 
 
 
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0 50 100 150 200 250
Time (min)
O
U
R
 (m
g 
O
2/L
.m
in
)
-0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
A
ci
d/
B
as
e 
A
dd
ed
 (m
eq
/L
)
OUR
Acid added
(proton consumed)
Base added
(proton produced)
Urea = 10 mgN/L
Acid added
(proton consumed)
 
(a) 
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0 50 100 150 200 250 300
Time (min)
O
U
R
 (m
g 
O
2/L
.m
in
)
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
A
ci
d/
B
as
e 
A
dd
ed
 (m
eq
/L
)
OUR
Acid added
(proton consumed)
Base added
(proton produced)
Ammonium =11 mgN/L
 
(b) 
 
Figure 2 OUR with titrimetric profiles for (a) urea nitrification (urea = 10 mgN/L) (b) ammonium 
nitrification (ammonium = 11 mgN/L) 
 
 
 211 
readily biodegradable compound like ammonium and hydrolysis was excluded in the nitrification 
modeling (Gernaey et al., 2001) to keep the model simple. However, this does not reflect the real 
life situation. Though the proton consumption (acid addition) during the urea nitrification is 
minor compared to the proton production (base addition) in the system, both the acid and base 
addition were found to increase proportionally with the increase in initial urea concentration 
(Hoque and Aravinthan, 2011). After the end of the feast period, the CO2 stripping leads the 
titrimetric process to drop the profile to the background proton consumption (acid addition) rate 
which was also observed before the addition of urea to the reactor when pH was maintained at 
7.8. 
   On the other hand, base addition occurs only during the feast period of ammonium 
nitrification. A similar observation was noted in the literature where proton production took place 
during the ammonium consumption period in an activated sludge system (Gernaey et al., 1997; 
2001; Petersen et al., 2001; Yuan and Bogaert, 2001). Under the endogenous phase, the titrimetric 
profile reaches its background proton consumption (acid addition) rate as observed before adding 
ammonium to the reactor. 
 
4.2  Results and discussion of model parameter estimation 
 
The nitrification model was calibrated with the experimental OUR and Hp measurements. Three 
different calibration approaches: using respirometric measurements alone, titrimetric 
measurements alone and combined respirometric-titrimetric measurements were applied for the 
precision of parameter estimation process. The model calibration results for urea and ammonium 
nitrification are presented in Figure 3 and Figure 4 respectively. Estimated model parameters 
corresponding to urea and ammonium nitrification are shown in Table 2 and Table 3 respectively 
along with calculation of 95% confidence intervals.  
   The parameter kN varies within a very narrow range from 0.059 to 0.061 min-1 when three 
different calibration approaches were applied for parameter estimation. There is little reported in 
the literature about urea ammonification (hydrolysis) kinetics to compare with current 
observations. However Spanjers and Vanrolleghem (1995) noted the organic nitrogen hydrolysis 
rate to be 0.04 min-1 when using raw wastewater as a test substrate. In the case of urea 
nitrification study, the average value of autotrophic maximum growth rate for the first 
nitrification step (MAX,A1) and second nitrification step (MAX,A2 ) are found to be increase from 
0.09 day-1 and 6.98x10-3 day-1 respectively. On the other hand, the estimated parameters MAX,A1 
and MAX,A2 varies from 0.036 to 0.038 day-1 and 9.2x10-3 to 9.73x10-3 day-1 for using ammonium 
as a test substrate. Baquerizo et al. (2005) estimated the parameter MAX,A1  as 0.82 day-1 which is 
significantly higher than the current observation. However, Gernaey et al. (2001) observed a 
maximum autotrophic biomass growth rate as slow as 4.7x10-3 day-1 during the first step of 
ammonium nitrification process. For both the urea and ammonium nitrification a very slow 
biomass growth rate was noticed during the second nitrification step (conversion of nitrite to 
nitrate) resulting nitrite accumulation in the liquid medium (Brouwer et al., 1998).  
    
    
 212 
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0 50 100 150 200 250
Time (min)
O
U
R
 (m
g 
O
2/L
.m
in
)
OURexp
OURmod
 
(a) 
-0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
0 50 100 150 200 250
Time (min)
Hp
 (m
eq
/L
)
Hp exp
Hp mod
 
(b) 
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0 50 100 150 200 250
Time (min)
O
U
R 
(m
g 
O
2/
L.
m
in
)
-0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
H
p 
(m
eq
/L
)
OURexp
OURmod
Hp exp
Hp mod
 
(c) 
 
Figure 3 Model calibration using (a) respirometric data alone (b) titrimetric data alone and (c) 
combined respirometric-titrimetric data (Urea = 10 mg N /L) 
 213 
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0 50 100 150 200 250 300
Time (min)
O
U
R
 (m
g 
O
2/L
.m
in
)
OURexp
OURmod
 
(a) 
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
0 50 100 150 200 250 300
Time (min)
H
p 
(m
eq
/L
)
Hp exp
Hp mod
 
(b) 
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0 50 100 150 200 250 300
Time (min)
O
U
R 
(m
g 
O
2/L
.m
in
)
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
H
p 
(m
eq
/L
)
OURexp
OURmod
Hp exp
Hp mod
 
(c) 
 
Figure 4 Model calibration using (a) respirometric data alone (b) titrimetric data alone and (c) 
combined respirometric-titrimetric data (Ammonium = 11 mg N /L) 
 214 
Table 2 Parameter estimation results using three different calibration approaches (Urea = 10 mg 
N/L) (confidence intervals are shown in brackets as percentages) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a MSE refers to the mean squared error which is calculated from sum of squared errors divided by 
number of observations 
b Parameters were fixed by trials for the better fit of experimental profile with the model  
 
Parameters 
Respirometric data 
alone 
(Confidence 
interval, %) 
Titrimetric data 
alone 
(Confidence 
interval, %) 
Combined data 
(Confidence 
interval, %) 
Parameters Estimated:    
1,AMAX
(1/min) 6.22x10-5 ± 7.14x10-8 
(0.12) 
6.22x10-5 ± 
8.72x10-8 
(0.14) 
6.22x10-5 ± 1.07x10-8 
(0.02) 
2,AMAX
(1/min) 4.86x10-6 ± 1.4x10-9 
(0.03) 
4.83x10-6 ± 
2.98x10-9 
(0.06) 
4.86x10-6 ± 2.7x10-9 
(0.06) 
kN (1/min) 0.061 ± 6.27x10-5 
(0.1) 
0.059 ± 1.82x10-5 
(0.03) 
0.059 ± 1.95x10-5 
(0.03) 
KSA1 (mgN/L) 0.273 ± 8.9x10-4 
(0.33) 
0.3 ± 3.5x10-4 
(0.12) 
0.289 ± 9.52x10-4 
(0.33) 
KSA2 (mgN/L) 0.2 ± 2.22x10-3 
(1.1) 
0.2 ± 0.059 
(29.5) 
0.2 ± 0.005 
(2.5) 
1AY  (mgCOD XB/mgN SNH) 0.204 ± 7.81x10
-5 
(0.04) 
0.204 ± 1.8x10-5 
(0.01) 
0.204 ± 1.22x10-4 
(0.06) 
2AY  (mgCOD XB/mgN SNO2) 0.025 ± 4.27x10
-5 
(0.17) 
0.026 ± 4.39x10-5 
(0.17) 
0.025 ± 8.21x10-5 
(0.33) 
Parameters Assumed:    
B (1/min) 0.0001042 0.0001042 0.0001042 
fXI (mgCOD /mgCOD) 0.2 0.2 0.2 
K1b (1/min) -- 1.5 1.5 
KLaCO2 (1/min) -- 0.0728 0.0728 
CT,initb  (mmol/L) -- 1.5 1.5 
Parameters Calculated:    
HCO3  (mmol/L) -- 1.4447 1.4447 
CO2 (mmol/L) -- 0.0553 0.0553 
XB  ( mgCOD/L) 1200 1200 1200 
MSE a 1.01x10-4 4.77x10-5 6.13x10-5 
 215 
Table 3 Parameter estimation results using three different calibration approaches (Ammonium = 
11 mg N/L) (confidence intervals are shown in brackets as percentages) 
 
 
 
The estimated parameter KSA1 gives an average value of 0.29 mg N/L that leads to the combined 
parameter (3.43-YA1).KSA1 as 0.936. Gernaey et al. (2001) recorded this combined parameter 
slightly higher (1.277) than the current observation when investigating urea nitrification kinetics 
in an activated sludge system. They also noted the parameter KSA1 within the range 0.25-0.3 
mg N/L when using ammonium as a test substrate. In this current study, the average value 
for the biomass yield coefficient YA1 is found to be 0.2 and 0.13 (mg COD/mg N) for urea and 
ammonium nitrification respectively. On the other hand, the average value for the parameter YA2 
was estimated as 0.025 and 0.054 (mg COD/mg N) for urea and ammonium nitrification 
respectively. Kim et al. (2009) noted the yield coefficients YA1 and YA2  as 0.33 and 0.083 respectively; 
however Pambrun et al. (2006) used lower value for the parameters YA1 (0.21) and YA2 (0.03) during 
Parameters 
Respirometric data 
alone 
(Confidence 
interval, %) 
Titrimetric data 
alone 
(Confidence 
interval, %) 
Combined data 
(Confidence 
interval, %) 
Parameters Estimated:    
1,AMAX (1/min) 2.62x10
-5 ± 
1.49x10-6 
(5.69) 
2.53x10-5 ± 
9.65x10-7 
(3.81) 
2.6x10-5 ± 9.66x10-
7 
(3.72) 
2,AMAX
(1/min) 6.39x10-6 ± 
5.41x10-7 
(8.47) 
6.76x10-6 ± 
2.54x10-7 
(3.76) 
6.4x10-6 ± 3.8x10-7 
(5.94) 
KSA1 (mgN/L) 0.294 ± 9.39x10-3 
(3.19) 
0.282 ± 0.014 
(4.96) 
0.292 ± 0.01 
(3.43) 
KSA2 (mgN/L) 0.084 ± 0.029 
(34.52) 
0.084 ± 0.019 
(22.62) 
0.084 ± 0.027 
(32.14) 
1AY  (mgCOD XB/mgN 
SNH) 
0.131 ± 7.5x10-3 
(5.73) 
0.128 ± 4.92x10-3 
(3.84) 
0.129 ± 4.89x10-3 
(3.79) 
2AY  (mgCOD XB/mgN 
SNO2) 
0.057 ± 5.52x10-3 
(9.68) 
0.049 ± 4.1x10-3 
(8.37) 
0.057 ± 3.92x10-3 
(6.88) 
Parameters Assumed:    
b (1/min)   0.0001042 0.0001042 0.0001042 
fXI (mgCOD /mgCOD) 0.2 0.2 0.2 
k1b (1/min)   -- 1.5 1.5 
KLaCO2 (1/min)   -- 0.0728 0.0728 
CT,initb  (mmol/L) -- 2.8 2.8 
Parameters Calculated:    
HCO3  (mmol/L) -- 2.6968 2.6968 
CO2 (mmol/L) -- 0.1032 0.1032 
XB  ( mgCOD/L) 1900 1900 1900 
MSE a 1.53x10-4 8.45x10-5 1.25x10-4 
a MSE refers to the mean squared error which is calculated from sum of squared errors 
divided by number of observations 
b Parameters were fixed by trials for the better fit of experimental profile with the model 
 216 
ammonium nitrification based model calibration. Gapes et al. (2003) used the yield coefficients YA1 and 
YA2 as 0.082 (mg VSS/mg-N) and 0.04 (mg VSS/mg-N) respectively when examining nitrification 
process in wastewater treatment. They chose these values in accordance with the guideline established by 
the EPA (EPA, 1993). After the unit conversion from “mg COD” to “mg VSS” the estimated parameters 
YA1 and YA2 from current observations are found to be 0.091 (mg VSS/mg-N) and 0.038 (mg VSS/mg-N) 
respectively where ammonium was used as test substrate. These are consistent with the literature (Gapes et 
al., 2003). 
   For all three calibration approaches the model parameters corresponding to urea and 
ammonium nitrification are found to be consistent with reasonable confidence intervals (Table 2 
and Table 3). This validates the accuracy of the model calibration and parameter estimation 
processes. In addition, the mean squared errors (MSEs), calculated from three different 
calibration approaches, are acceptable and statistically confirm the soundness of the nitrification 
model. Gernaey et al. (2001) verified the respirometric method of their proposed model by 
investigating the linearity between BODst values and NH4-N concentrations added to the 
activated sludge. With this in mind, an attempt was made in this current study to determine the 
relationship between BODst and substrate concentration (as pressed mg N/L). It is to be noted that 
experiments with different initial substrate concentration were conducted to investigate the effect 
of initial concentration on nitrification kinetics (Hoque and Aravinthan, 2011). Model calibration 
and parameter estimation corresponding to varying initial concentration are not demonstrated in 
this paper. However, the relationship between BODst and substrate concentration is presented in 
Figure 5. 
Ammonium
y = 4.3936x
R2 = 1
Urea 
y = 4.3129x
R2 = 0.9996
0
20
40
60
80
100
0 3 6 9 12 15 18 21
Substrate concentration (mg N/L)
B
O
D
st
 (m
g 
O
2/
L)
Ammonium
Urea
Linear (Ammonium)
Linear (Urea)
 
Figure 5 BODst as a function of the initial substrate concentration (expressed as mg N/L) 
 
The area under the OUR profiles were considered to calculate the BODst for respective substrate 
concentration study. The slope (4.57-YA) of the BODst vs NH4-N concentration curve is typically 
expected to be 4.33 g O2/g NH4-N (Henze et al., 1987).  From the Figure 5 the slopes of the 
curves are found to be 4.31 g O2/g NH4-N and 4.39 g O2/g NH4-N for urea and ammonium 
nitrification respectively. Though the slope for ammonium nitrification study is slightly higher 
 217 
than expected, the current observations are reasonable when compared to the study by Gernaey et 
al.(2001) who found the slope as high as 4.44 g. 
 
Conclusions 
 
This paper covers the estimation of nitrification process kinetics in an activated sludge system 
where urea and ammonium were selected as test organic and inorganic nitrogen compound 
respectively.  The recently developed two-step nitrification model was used for the calibration 
and model parameter estimation since this model incorporates the dynamic CO2 transfer principle 
along with paying due attention to substrate (urea) biodegradation pathway to reflect the real 
scenario of oxidation process in liquid medium. The suitability of the nitrification model was 
justified for test substrate oxidation processes where on-line respirometric and titrimetric 
measurements were used during model calibration.  For both the urea and ammonium 
nitrification studies, the model successfully explained the on-line measurements since the model 
was found to fit well with experimental observations. In addition, the estimated model parameters 
were found to be consistent for all three calibration approaches with reasonable confidence 
intervals thereby confirming the precision of model calibration and parameter estimation method.  
 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
The authors are grateful to the University of Southern Queensland (USQ) and Australian Centre 
for Sustainable Catchments of University of Southern Queensland for their financial supports to 
this research. Besides, authors wish to thank the Wetalla Water Reclamation Plant authority 
(Toowoomba City Council) for their kind cooperation.  
 
 
 218 
 
 
 
 
 
Symbols and abbreviations   
 
ASM Activated Sludge Model OURend Endogenous oxygen uptake rate (mg 
O2/L.d) 
b Endogenous decay coefficient of biomass 
(day-1) 
pK1 Negative logarithm of the first acidity 
constant in the CO2 equilibrium 
BODst Short-term biochemical oxygen demand  pKNH4 Negative logarithm of the equilibrium 
constant for NH4+ dissociation   
CHaObNc Elemental composition of biomass (C-mol) 
2COS  CO2 concentration in liquid phase (mmol/L) 
CT,init Total inorganic carbon in the aqueous 
medium  
(mmol CO2/L) 
2
*
COS  CO2 saturation concentration at 1 atm 
(mmol/L) 
CTR CO2 transfer rate (mmol CO2/L.d) 
3HCOS  Bicarbonate concentration in liquid phase (mmol/L) 
DO Dissolved oxygen  
NHS  Ammonium concentration (mg N/L) 
fBA Fraction of autotrophic biomass in the 
mixed culture (mg COD/mg COD) 2NO
S  Nitrite concentration (mg N/L) 
fXI Inert fraction of biomass (mg COD/mg 
COD) 
OS  Dissolved oxygen concentration in 
liquid phase (mg/L) 
Hp Proton concentration in liquid phase 
(meq/L) 
XB Biomass concentration (mg COD/L) 
iNXI Nitrogen content of the inert fraction of 
biomass (g N/g COD XI) 
XB(0) Initial biomass concentration (mg 
COD/L) 
iNBM Nitrogen content of biomass (g N/g COD 
XB) 
XI Inert particulate COD (mg COD/L) 
k1 Forward reaction rate for aqueous CO2 
equilibrium (day-1) 
XN Degradable organic nitrogen (mg N/L) 
kN Ammonification (hydrolysis) rate (day-1) YA1 Autotrophic biomass yield of the first 
nitrification step (mg COD/mg N) 
aK L  Oxygen mass transfer coefficient    (day-
1) 
YA2 Autotrophic biomass yield of the second 
nitrification step (mg COD/mg N) 
2COL
aK  CO2 mass transfer coefficient (day-1)  First order time constant (day) 
KSA1 Substrate affinity constant for the first 
nitrification step (mg N/L) 
µMAX,A1 Maximum autotrophic biomass growth 
rate for the first nitrification step (day-1) 
KSA2 Substrate affinity constant for the second 
nitrification step (mg N/L) 
µMAX,A2 Maximum autotrophic biomass growth 
rate for the second nitrification step 
(day-1) 
MSE Mean squared error X Degree of reduction of biomass (mol 
electron/C-mol) 
OUR Oxygen uptake rate (mg O2/L.d)   
 219 
References 
 
ASCE. (1996). Standard Guidelines for In-Process Oxygen Transfer Testing. ASCE-18-96. 
Baquerizo, G., Maestre, J. P., Sakuma, T., Deshusses, M. A., Gamisans, X., Gabriel, D., and 
Lafuente, J. (2005). A detailed model of a biofilter for ammonia removal: Model parameters 
analysis and model validation. Chemical Engineering Journal, 113, 205-214. 
Brouwer, H., Klapwijk, A., and Keesman, K. J. (1998). Identification of activated sludge and 
wastewater characteristics using respirometric batch-experiments. Water Research, 32(4), 
1240-1254. 
Buck, K. R., Chavez, F. P., and Campbell, L. (1996). Basin-wide distributions of living carbon 
components and the inverted trophic pyramid of the central gyre of the North Atlantic Ocean, 
summer 1993. Aquatic Microbial Ecology, 10, 283-298. 
EPA (1993). Process chemistry and kinetics of biological nitrification. Manual: Nitrogen control 
(Chapter 3), EPA, Ohio, US. 
Gapes, D., Pratt, S., Yuan, Z., and Keller, J. (2003). Online titrimetric and off-gas analysis for 
examining nitrification processes in wastewater treatment. Water Research, 37(11), 2678-2690. 
Gernaey, A. K., Petersen, B., Ottoy, J. P., and Vanrolleghem, P. (2001). Activated sludge 
monitoring with combined respirometric-titrimetric measurements. Water Research, 35(5), 
1280-1294. 
Gernaey, K., Bogaert, H., Massone, A., Vanrolleghem, P., and Verstraete, W. (1997). On-line 
nitrification monitoring in activated sludge with a titrimetric sensor. Environmental Science & 
Technology, 31(8), 2350-2355. 
Gernaey, K., Petersen, B., Dochain, D., and Vanrolleghem, P. A. (2002). Modeling aerobic carbon 
source degradation processes using titrimetric data and combined respirometric-titrimetric 
data: Structural and practical identifiability. Biotechnology and Bioengineering, 79(7), 754-
767. 
Gernaey, K., Vanrolleghem, P., and Verstraete, W. (1998). On-line estimation of Nitrosomonas 
kinetic parameters in activated sludge samples using titration in-sensor-experiments. Water 
Research, 32(1), 71-80. 
Havlin, J. L., Beaton, J. D., Tisdale, S. L., and Nelson, W. L. (1999). Soil Fertility and 
Fertilizers: An Introduction to Nutrient Management, Prentice Hall, New York. 
Henze, M., Grady, C. J., Gujer, W., Marais, G., and Matsuo, T. (1987). Activated Sludge Model 
No. 1. IAWPRC Scientific and Technical Report No. 1, IAWPRC, London, UK. 
Hoque, M.A., Aravinthan, V., Porter, M. (2008). Respirometric and titrimetric techniques for 
monitoring aerobic biodegradation of surfactant. Research Journal of Biotechnology (special 
issue-2008), 399-405. 
Hoque, M.A. and Aravinthan, V. (2011). Modeling urea biodegradation in activated sludge using 
combined respirometric-titrimetric measurements. Desalination and Water Treatment, 32, 
115-125. 
Karahan-Gul, O., Van Loosdrecht, M. C. M., and Orhon, D. (2003). Modification of Activated 
Sludge Model no. 3 considering direct growth on primary substrate. Water Science and 
Technology, 47(11), 219-225. 
Kim, J.-H., Guo, X., Behera, S. K., and Park, H.-S. (2009). A unified model of ammonium 
oxidation rate at various initial ammonium strength and active ammonium oxidizer 
concentrations. Bioresource Technology, 100(7), 2118-2123. 
Pambrun, V., Paul, E., and Sperandio, M. (2006). Modeling the partial nitrification in squencing 
batch reactor for biomass adapted to high ammonia concentraions. Biotechnology and 
 220 
Bioengineering, 95(1), 120-131. 
Petersen, B., Gernaey, K., and Vanrolleghem, P. A. (2001). Practical identifiability of model 
parameters by combined respirometric-titrimetric measurements. Water Science Technology, 
43(7), 347-356. 
Pratt, S., Yuan, Z., Gapes, D., Dorigo, M., Zeng, R., and Keller, J. (2003). Development of a 
novel titration and off-gas analysis (TOGA) sensor for study of biological processes in 
wastewater treatment systems. Biotechnology and Bioengineering, 81(4), 482-495. 
Sin, G. (2004). Systematic calibration of activated sludge models, PhD thesis: Faculty of 
Agricultural and Applied Biological Science, Ghent University Belgium. 
Sin, G., and Vanrolleghem, P. A. (2007). Extensions to modeling aerobic carbon degradation 
using combined respirometric-titrimetric measurements in view of activated sludge model 
calibration. Water Research, 41(15), 3345-3358. 
Spanjers, H., and Vanrolleghem, P. (1995). Respirometry as a tool for rapid characterization of 
wastewater and activated sludge. Water Science and Technology, 31(2), 105-114. 
Sperandio, M., and Paul, E. (1997). Determination of carbon dioxide evolution rate using on-line 
gas analysis during dynamic biodegradation experiments. Biotechnology and Bioengineering, 
53(3), 243-252. 
Stumm, W., and Morgan, J. J. (1996). Aquatic Chemistry: chemical equilibria and rates in 
natural waters, 3rd Ed., John Wiley and Sons, Inc. 
Yuan, Z., and Bogaert, H. (2001). A titrimetric respirometer measuring the nitrifiable nitrogen in 
wastewater using in-sensor-experiment. Water Research, 35(1), 180-188. 
 
. 
 
221 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
APPLICATION OF CONCEPTUAL HYDROLOGICAL MODELS (RAINFALL-
RUNOFF) IN PREDICTING UNGAUGED CATCHMENTS: DILETTANTISM TO 
DILIGENCE IN HYDROLOGY 
 
 
             Syed Abu Shoaib1, András Bárdossy2 and Nahid Sultana3,1 
 
  
ABSTRACT: Stream flow data are a prerequisite for planning and management of water 
resources such as design of hydropower plants, dams and barrages, assessment of water 
availability for irrigation and other water uses, assessment of flood and drought risks, and 
examining the ecological health of a river system. Unfortunately, most of the catchments are 
ungauged or poorly gauged with limited data. The prediction of the hydrologic response of 
ungauged catchments is a deep-seated problem in hydrology. In spite of substantial advancement 
in hydrology, the prediction of stream flow for ungauged or poorly gauged catchments still 
remains as most important challenge. Still now different studies generated different results. 
Firstly, the methodologies used in each type of approach depend on a number of unavoidable 
arbitrary choices made by the researchers, which can influence the performance of the 
regionalized model (number of donor catchments, density of gauged catchments, and use of 
poorly modeled catchments as donors). Secondly, the accessible catchment descriptors vary from 
one study to another. Thirdly the performance of each regionalization approach may depend on 
the structure and parameterization of the rainfall-runoff models used. Catchment properties and 
Hydrological Model parameters are used consistently to predict ungauged catchments. Unluckily 
this blend was not used properly to find the appropriate solution. In this regard, data transfers 
from gauged “donor” catchments to ungauged catchments are seen as superior to the estimation 
from catchment descriptors alone. A donor or analogue catchments (e.g. close to subject 
catchment, of similar size, physiography, land use, soil, etc.) offer gauged data of good quality. In 
our study, we identify the gauged donor catchments to predict ungauged catchments. Data depth 
function plays key role in identifying donor catchments. Two conceptual rainfall-runoff models: 
HYMOD and HBV are used in this study. We applied Robust Parameter Estimation (ROPE) 
algorithm to ensure all parameter vectors robust with hydrologically representative, insensitive as 
well as transferable with good model performance. Sensitivity of hydrological model parameters 
(HBV Model) is evaluated to find unique solution in predicting ungauged basin. 
 
 
 
                                                        
1 Scientific officer, Water Resources Planning Organization, shoaibmila@yahoo.com 
2 Professor, Institute of Hydraulic Engineering, University of Stuttgart, Germany, 
andras.bardossy@iws.uni-stuttgart.de 
3 Researcher, Institute of Environmental Studies, University of  New South Wales, Sydney, Australia, 
n.sultana@unsw.edu.au 
222 
 
1. Introduction 
 
1.1. Regionalization Process 
 
The system of linking or relating hydrological phenomena to physical and climatic characteristics 
of a catchment, or region, is commonly called regionalization. Regionalization processes draw 
more attention with the growing demand to harness untapped potential of river water resources in 
many parts of the world. Assessing homogeneity is very important for estimation of flow in 
ungauged catchments by regional analysis.  In addition, preliminary screening of catchments for 
homogeneity is possible with the aid of hydro-meteorological and topographic characteristics of 
catchments in a region. The need to devise new approaches and methodologies for assessment of 
water resources is the ultimate target of this study. Figure 1 shows the possibility of predicting 
ungauged basin through regionalization process using neighborhood donor catchments. It is said 
that over-parameterization, dependency on input data bias, and lack of a systematic link between 
parameter precision and model efficiency is the three main factors [Andre´assian  et al. (2003)] 
which complicate the regionalization of conceptual rainfall–runoff models 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        Figure 1 Schematic representation of the Regionalization process 
 
In these chapter most applicable methods in regionalization process to predict ungauged basins is 
discussed 
 
1.2  Spatial Proximity 
 
Spatial proximity is one of the earliest regionalization approaches to model ungauged catchments 
[e.g., see Egbuniwe and Todd, 1976; Vandewiele et al., 1991]. In this method parameter values 
are calibrated for geographic neighbors, assuming physical and climatic characteristics are 
relatively homogeneous within a region. So it’s reasonable to conclude that neighbors would 
behave similarly.This approach consists of transferring parameters from neighboring catchments 
to the ungauged catchment. The inspiration being that catchments that are close to each other 
should have similar behavior since climate and catchment conditions should vary evenly in space. 
223 
 
This approach is naturally attractive, although it apparently depends on the density of the gauged 
basin network. Many fine-tunings of this approach have been proposed, such as inverse distance 
weighting applied to the donor catchments, kriging of model parameter values [see, e.g., Parajka 
et al., 2007], regional pooling for model calibration [Goswami et al., 2007]. The selection of the 
donor catchments is based on the proximity of the ungauged catchments to the gauged ones. 
Normally the distance between catchment centroids is used. 
 
Merz and Blöschl [2004] and Parajka et al. [2005] tried to regionalize an 11-parameter version of 
the HBV model. Their analysis, based on more than 300 Austrian catchments, showed that 
regionalization based on spatial proximity with transposition of an entire set of parameters offers 
the best model performance on ungauged catchments. They also note that using nested 
catchments as donors may considerably improve the basic spatial proximity approach. 
 
Oudin et al. [2008] evaluated three widely used regionalization approaches for (a large number 
of) 913 French catchments (10– 9390 km2) by using two conceptual rainfall–runoff models 
(GR4J and TOPMO models). They showed that the spatial proximity based regionalization 
performed the best for their sample of catchments. They also noted that the dense network of 
tested catchments used in their study might have resulted in favor of spatial proximity approach 
and recommended that this approach should also be tested in other regions, particularly where 
less gauged catchments are available. 
 
1.3  The Multi Model Approach 
 
The gauged catchments and the associated conceptual rainfall–runoff relations i.e. the models, are 
not equally valuable as sources of information for application to ungauged catchments, even 
irrespective of the degree of homogeneity of a region. Mingling these various sources of 
information in an efficient consensus form may be a useful means of utilizing all relevant and 
available information. The multi-model approach is an effective means of such Mingling. This 
approach recognized that (i) each model has its inherent strengths and weaknesses, (ii) the 
‘‘plurality of models and modeling approaches may be valid for the same catchment and 
application’’[Sivapalan et al., 2003], (iii) it is possible to use a number of models simultaneously 
whereby the strengths of individual models are pooled and perceptible weaknesses de-
emphasized to produce a consensus output. For achieving consensus outputs by combination, the 
neural network method (NNM), the weighted average method (WAM), and the simple average 
method (SAM) are used. These techniques are described by Shamseldin et al. [1997] and 
Shamseldin and O’Connor [1999].  
 
Xiong et al. [2001] used a Takagi–Sugeno model in a flood forecasting study, combining the 
forecasts of five different rainfall–runoff models. See and Abrahart [2001] used an amalgamation 
of neural network, fuzzy logic, statistical, and persistence forecasts to produce a single predicted 
output following a multi-model data-fusion approach to hydrological forecasting. Working within 
a multi-model framework, Aspinall [2004] used multiple models of land use patterns to draw 
inference from a set of time-variant models. With this growing evidence of the advantages of the 
multi-model approach, its application to flow simulation in an ungauged catchment is considered 
worthy. 
 
 
224 
 
Goswami et al. [2007] developed a methodology that uses multi-model approach for simulating 
stream flows in ungauged catchments. Like other methods, their methodology did not involve 
transfer of model parameters from gauged catchment to ungauged catchment, and model 
parameters need not to be related to physical catchment descriptors. They used seven different 
models for regionalization and for each tested the three methods that involve the use of the 
discharge series by taking regional averages, regional pooling of data and transposition of 
discharge data of the nearest neighbor. They used 12 gauged catchments in France to illustrate 
their methodology and each time considered one of them as ungauged for the application of the 
method and then compared the results with observed time series of daily discharge using the NSE 
criterion. The results indicated a mix of success and failure for the individual catchments and 
tested methods. However, they concluded that the pooling method of regionalization coupled 
with the conceptual soil moisture accounting and routing model (SMAR) was the best approach 
for simulating flows in ungauged catchments in that region. The second best method was the 
transposition of data from the nearest neighbor provided the catchments are similar in the hydro-
meteorological, physiographic characteristics and drainage area. 
 
1.4 Flow Duration Curve Approach 
 
Regionalization through Flow duration curve (FDC) is developed very recently. FDCs are often 
used for comparing the response of gauged catchments, but their potential use for the 
regionalization of conceptual rainfall–runoff models for flow estimation for the poorly gauged 
catchments is still need to be explored. Masih et al. [2010] showed that the above mentioned 
method require very limited data resources and were most suitable in the context of the data 
limited region. In their study, they examined the application of the HBV model for stream flow 
time series generation in data limited catchments of the Karkheh river basin, Iran, using model 
parameters transferred from similar gauged catchments. The similarities of the catchments for 
model parameter transfer were determined based on drainage area, spatial proximity, catchment 
characteristics and flow duration curve (FDC). Although the stream flow validation results based 
on spatial proximity and catchment characteristics are better than those based on geographical 
area, the overall results remain unsatisfactory in most cases. The study illustrated that catchment 
similarity analysis based on FDCs provides a sound basis for transferring model parameters from 
gauged catchments to data limited catchments in the Karkheh basin. In most cases, the simulated 
time series of stream flows resulted in reasonably good values of the examined performance 
indicators (i.e., NSE, R2 and VB) with negligible impact of the parameter uncertainty on the 
regionalization outcome. 
 
Masih et al. [2010] compared FDC based regionalization approach with the most promising 
techniques developed elsewhere. In their study, they showed that for five out of seven catchments 
in Karkheh basin, Iran (where FDC similarity was well established) were in the range of 0.54–
0.87 in terms of daily R2 values and 0.23–0.78 in terms of daily NSE values.On the other hand, 
the regionalization results based on the estimation of model parameters using catchment 
characteristics, showed variable degree of success.The presented daily NSE values were in the 
range of 0.02–0.45 and 0.23–0.72 for the parameter regionalization studies of Servat and Dezetter 
[1993] and Seibert [1999], respectively. Similarly, the studies of Servat and Dezetter [1993] and 
Abdulla and Lettenmaier [1997] reported R2 values in the range of 0.62–0.99 and 0.05–0.81, 
respectively. A similar trend of variable performance can be seen in many methods other than 
parameter regionalization, e.g. Merz and Blöschl [2004] achieved median NSE values in the 
225 
 
range of 0.32–0.56 for their eight regionalization methods tested for the 308 catchments and 
Goswami et al. [2007] indicated NSE values in the range -27.66 to 0.94 for their regional pooling 
method.  
 
For poorly gauged catchments, the available records, though short, could be used for the FDC 
construction. These insufficient records may not be used directly for rainfall–runoff modelling. 
Another limitation in their direct use for modelling purpose is the unavailability of other 
corresponding data sets required for modelling, e.g. climatic data for the same period as of runoff 
data may not be available. 
 
2.  Conceptual Rainfall-Runoff Model & Methodology  
 
Rainfall-runoff models are standard tools for hydrologic analysis. It is used to extrapolate strea
m flow time-series in time and space for operational and scientific investigations. 
Rainfall-runoff models allow extending available stream flow records in time to predict th
e behavior of catchments for different climate scenarios. Through extrapolation in space, t
hey enable us to simulate the response of catchments for which little or no time series o
f streamflow measurements are available. Any Rainfall-runoff model can be written in the
 following simplified form [Wagener et al., 2004] 
 
                    Q = ( | I) +  ……………. (1) 
 
where Q is the simulated streamflow, I is a matrix of input variables (e.g. rainfall and te
mperature), is a given (local) model structure,  is a vector of parameters within this
 structure and  is an error term. The model parameters will usually be estimated throug
h calibration if measured time-series of runoff over a sufficiently long period are availabl
e. The required length of the time-series depends, amongst other things, on the complexit
y of the model structure used and the information content of the available data. However,
 in principle, the data set should always be sufficiently long to avoid the problem of the
 parameters only being representative of a particular climate period (Gan and Burges, 199
0). 
 
The HBV model [Bergström, 1992] is a conceptual rainfall–runoff model which simulates daily 
discharge using as input variables daily rainfall, temperature and daily or monthly estimates of 
ETo. A number of studies have recognized its suitability in regionalization studies[e.g. Seibert, 
1999; Merz and Blöschl, 2004; Götzinger and Bárdossy, 2007; Masih et al. 2010]. Systematic 
representation of the HBV Model is give at Figure 2 
226 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2 Scheme of HBV Rainfall-Runoff Model 
 
 
 
 
 
 
227 
 
The HBV model consists of different routines representing the snow accumulation and snowmelt 
by a degree–day method, recharge and actual evapo-transpiration as functions of the actual water 
storage in a soil box, runoff generation by two linear reservoirs with three possible outlets (i.e., 
runoff components), and channel routing by a simple triangular weighting function. Parameter 
range used for the simulation of the HBV model is given in Table 1 
 
 
Table 1: Model Parameters range for the HBV 
 
Parameter Description Max Min 
DD Degree - day factor 5 0.5 
Dew Precipitation/ degree-day relation 2 0 
Tcrit Threshold  Temperature for snow melt initiation 2 -2 
β Model parameter (shape coefficient) 6 1 
L Threshold  water level for near surface flow 30 1 
k0  Near surface flow storage constant 20 0.5 
k1 Interflow storage constant 50 5 
Kperc Percolation storage constant 100 20 
k2 Baseflow storage constant 1000 10 
 
 
3.  Sensitivity of the HBV Model Parameters 
 
Individual sensitivity of the HBV model parameters will be discussed in this section. Increase of 
near surface flow storage constant (K0) only increase the peaks in the wet season, but has no 
influence on the water balance.  Increase of K1 also increase the peaks but reduce the storage 
which contributes to dry season discharge. Increase of Permanent wilting point (PWP) means the 
soil need more water to sustain the plants and more water will be kept in the soil and less water 
will be evaporated, in turn the overall discharge is increased. But it has no influence on the 
dynamics of the discharge. In general, increase of PWP decrease the actual evapotranspiration 
which in turn increase the discharge. Since L determines, when surface runoff occurs, it reflects 
the storage capacity of the reservoir system. It should be scaled according to the ratio of the 
different temporal resolutions. If the temporal resolution of HBV calculation is refined from daily 
to hourly, then water level for near surface flow L in HBV reservoir model should be reduced 
approximately by a factor of 24. On the other hand DD or Cmelt reflects how much snow will be 
melted if the actual temperature is 10C degree lower than Tcrit. It has not much to do with the 
temporal resolution of the model, it take the time for the snow to melt even if the actual 
temperature is below Tcrit, after a critical time the snow starts to melt. Increase of Tcrit has 
impact in snow accumulation-peak discharge decrease, but during snow melt peak discharge 
increases. Increase of K0 and K1 will increase the peaks  in wet seasons but decrease the 
discharge in dry seasons. Increase of base flow storage constant k2 almost has no influence in 
peak discharge, but discharge in dry periods decreased slightly. 
 
To predict the ungauged basin we choose donor catchments which have available data to predict 
ungauged catchments. In this case seven catchment properties were selected to find the data depth 
228 
 
among the 279 Eastern USA catchments.  Lowest Data depth or the catchments with Zero depth 
was considered as the donor catchments. Seven catchment properties are: Area, Shape factor, 
Hydraulic Conductivity, Average porosity, Field Capacity, Snow proportion and Precipitation 
seasonality index. 
 
4.  Objective Function & Model Performance 
 
It’s worth to mention that, objective function plays a very important role in calibration. Different 
objective functions might lead to different optimization results. Singh (2010) reported different 
model parameter distributions during calibration using 8 different objective functions. Some of 
the objective functions used in this study are given below. 
 
Nash-Sutcliffe (1970) efficiency coefficient (NS): 
 
 
                 
 
Where  is the mean observed discharge,  is modeled discharge at time t,  is observed 
discharge at time t, and T is the total number of time steps. 
 
Nash-Sutcliffe efficiency determines the relative magnitude of the residual variance (described by 
the nominator in the expression above) compared to the measured data variance (described by the 
denominator). It can range from - ∞ to 1.An efficiency of 1 corresponds to a perfect match of 
modelled discharge to the observed data. An efficiency of 0 indicates that the model predictions 
are as accurate as the mean of the observed data, whereas efficiency less than 0 occur when the 
observed mean is a better predictor than the model. This efficiency is greatly influenced by the 
peak flow values.  
 
5.  Root mean squared error (RMSE): 
 
Root mean square error (RMSE) is a frequently-used measure of the differences between values 
predicted by a model and the values actually observed discharge. 
 
It can be formulated as: 
 
RMSE =  
 
Unlike Nash-Sutcliffe efficiency which is a dimensionless value, root mean square error has the 
same unit as the observed value. It can range from - ∞ to 1.The lower the RMSE value, the better 
the result is. 
 
All in all, Nash-Sutcliffe efficiency measures how good a modelled simulation is compared to the 
mean observed value as prediction. While root mean square error measures the direct variance of 
229 
 
modelled discharges from observations. 
 
The third measure of model performance used here is the volume error VE, which is a measure of 
bias and is defined as  
 
VE =  
 
Volume error close to zero signifies no bias in the Model. Values larger and smaller than zero 
indicate an overestimation and underestimation of the total runoff volume, respectively[ Merz et 
al. 2011]. Usually, Correlation coefficient is calculated to find the consistency with the observed 
to model data.The three objective functions used in this study are those measures most wi
dely used in hydrological modelling to assess model performance. Different objective func
tions give different weights to different parts of a hydrograph, hence various types of obj
ective functions will be used for model identification depending on the purpose of the m
odel.  
 
6.  Study Area 
 
This Study was carried on using the data of Eastern USA catchments from the period 1948 to 
2003.The eastern United States has a diversified topography. Rolling hills and temperate forests 
is one of the important features of this area. A line of low mountains form by the Appalachian 
Mountains, separate the eastern seaboard from the Great Lakes and the Mississippi Basin. The 
five Great Lakes are located in the north-central portion of the country. The southeast United 
States contain subtropical forests and, near the gulf coast, mangrove wetlands, especially in 
Florida. West of the Appalachians lies the Mississippi River basin and two large eastern 
tributaries, the Ohio River and the Tennessee River. The Ohio and Tennessee Valleys and the 
Midwest consist largely of rolling hills and productive farmland, stretching south to the Gulf 
Coast. Elevation ranges from 21.9 to 1212 m above sea level. Two hundred seventy nine 
catchments data were used with areas ranging from 2 to 193 km2 and a median area of 122.9 km2. 
 
7.  Physical Process and Model Performance  
Conceptually Donor and Ungauged (inside) catchments is the most important part of this study 
but for input of the model parameter, precipitation and temperature data is the fundamental in 
Hydrological modeling. Selection of donor catchments and the assumed ungauged catchments is 
performed with the help of SAV (selection of appropriate variables) algorithm (Bárdossy and 
Singh, 2011). Based on properties of catchments one can define which catchments lies inside of 
the convex hull or outside of the convex hull. Those catchments lies outside of the convex hull 
are good donor. Catchments lies inside the convex hull are assumed as ungauged catchments. 
Figure 3 shows the precipitation and temperature pattern in donor, and pseudo (assumed) 
ungauged inside catchments (left to right). Highest precipitation and temperature is recorded in 
the period of June-July-August of the selected donor catchments. On the other hand, for assumed 
ungauged inside catchments highest precipitation is recorded in the month of January-February-
March but highest temperature is observed in the same period as in donor catchments 
 
230 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Box-Whisker plots to show the Precipitation and temperature change over the year in 
the 279 Eastern USA catchments. From top left to right precipitation of donor & inside 
catchments and in bottom temperature accordingly. 
 
 
8.  Parameter sensitivity in HBV Model with Model performance 
 
In this section the parameter sensitivity of HBV model is analyzed. Conceptualization of the 
HBV is done with (i) 11 parameters including Field capacity (FC) and Permanent Wilting Point 
(PWP) (ii) 8 parameters with assuming Tcrit = 0 and assuming the value of FC & PWP (iii) 9 
parameters and assuming the value of FC & PWP. 
231 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Box-Whisker plots to show Nash-Sutcliffe model efficiencies (NS) and volume errors 
(VE) of the donor, and assumed ungauged inside catchments for the whole time period (1948-
2003) with HBV 
 
  
 
232 
 
The parameter sensitivity of the catchment ID 1371500 is presented below, which is located in 
wallkill river at gardiner, New York. Figure 5(a) shows that HBV model parameter value of Beta 
(shape coefficient) increases with the increased number of model parameter. Model performance 
(NS) of HBV also increased with increased number of parameter [Figure 5(b)]. On the other 
hand , in the most of the case parameter values of Near surface flow storage constant(k0), 
Percolation storage constant(Kperc), Baseflow storage constant(k2) increased with 9 parameters 
HBV. But Interflow storage constant (k1) shows different trend. In this case parameter value 
shows higher trend in 11 parameters HBV.  No specific conclusion can be drawn for the 
variation of Threshold water level for near surface flow (L), as it fluctuate in three different case 
of the study. 8 parameters HBV shows uniform as well as high value in most cases of the 
parameter Degree - day factor (DD),  high Precipitation/ degree-day relation(Dew) than other 
two alternatives. 
 
Figure 5(a) Optimization of HBV Model parameter: Beta 
 
Figure 5 (b) HBV model performance with changing parameters 
 
 
233 
 
Conclusions 
 
Perspectives of predicting ungauged basins have a propensity to be heavily biased due to large 
variety of misconceptions. Ability to differentiate between hydrology and water management, 
Climate change and hydrology, hydrology and statistics, facts and assumptions, science and 
convenience enhance the capacity to predict ungauged basins. In our analysis we blend catchment 
properties with the model parameter performance to predict ungauged basins. Understanding of 
the physical process in selecting the catchment properties to represent the catchment behavior is a 
important part of the muddle up with model to regionalized with the actual system of the 
catchments. Selecting the donor catchments using data depth- low depth or depth with zero value 
and consecutively determination of inside catchments with high data depth integrate the 
methodology of our research. To find the best possible outcome we use the minimum of the 
maximum possible weight from the donor catchments to predict the neighborhood ungauged 
catchments. Deepest parameter set of the donor catchment were chosen to ensure the consistency 
of our model. Thus a significant effort is taken to correlate catchment hydrology with model 
parameter. In this study we introduced the use of the different regionalization approaches in a 
complementary fashion, i.e., in a multi-regionalization approach, that could be another reason to 
the effectiveness of our research approach 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
We appreciate the cooperation of Dr. Thorsten Wagener, Associate professor, The Pennsylvani
a State University, USA, Dr. Shailiesh kumar Singh and Ms. Yingchun Huang, PhD student 
of University of Stuttgart, Germany  
 
References 
 
Andre´assian, V., Rojas-Serna, C., Michel, C., Perrin, Ch., Mouelhi, S., Loumagne, C., (2003). Is 
the regionalization of conceptual rainfall–runoff models impossible? Geographical  Research 
Abstracts. European  Geophysical Society 5, 04175. 
Bárdossy, A., Singh, S. K.,(2011) Regionalization of hydrological model parameters using data 
depth. Hydrology research Vol. 4 no 5, 356-371. 
Bárdossy, A., Singh, S. K.,(2008): Robust estimation of hydrological model parameters. 
Hydrology and Earth System Science 12, 1273-1283. 
Bergström, S. (1992): The HBV model, in Computer Models of Watershed Hydrology, edited by 
V. P. Singh, pp. 443– 476, Water Resour. Publ.,Highlands Ranch, Colo . 
Egbuniwe, N., and D. K. Todd (1976): Application of the stanford watershed model to Nigerian 
watersheds, Water Resour. Bull., 12, 449– 460. 
Goswami, M., O’Connor, K.M., Bhattarai, K.P., (2007): Development of regionalization 
procedures using a multi-model approach for flow simulation in an ungauged catchment. J. 
Hydrol. 333, 517-531 
Götzinger, J. and Bárdossy, A.( 2006): Comparison of four regionalisation methods for a 
distributed hydrological model, Journal of Hydrology, 333, 374-384. 
Gupta, H.V., Beven, K.J., Wagener, T. (2004):Model calibration and uncertainty estimation. In 
Andersen, M. (ed.) Encyclopedia of Hydrological Sciences. In Press 
234 
 
Masih, I., Uhlenbrook, S., Maskey, S. and Ahmad, M.D.(2010): Regionalization of a conceptual 
rainfall-runoff model based on similarity of the flow duration curve: A case study from the 
semi-arid Karkheh basin, Iran, Journal of Hydrology, doi: 10.1016/j.jhydrol.2010.07.018 
Merz, R., and G. Blöschl (2004): Regionalisation of catchment model parameters, J. Hydrol., 287, 
95– 123 
Merz, R., Parajka, J., Bloschl, G.(2011): Time stability of catchment model parameters: 
Implications for climate impact analyses. Water Resour. Res.,47, 2531.  
Nash, J., Sutcliffe, J.(1970): River forecasting using conceptual models, 1. A discussion of 
principles. Journal of Hydrology 10, 282-290 
Oudin, L., Andreassian, V., Perrin, C., Michel, C., Le Moine, N., 2008:Spatial proximity, physical 
similarity, regression and ungaged catchments: a comparison of regionalization approaches 
based on 913 French catchments. Water Resour. Res. 44, W03413, doi: 
10.1029/2007WR006240. 
Parajka, J., Merz, R., Blöschl, G. (2005): A comparison of regionalisation methods for catchment 
model parameters. Hydrol. Earth Sys. Sci. Discuss. 2, 509–542. 
Parajka, J., G. Blöschl, and R. Merz (2007):Regional calibration of catchment 
models: Potential for ungauged catchments, Water Resour. Res., 43, W06406, 
doi:10.1029/2006WR005271 
Shamseldin, A.Y., (1997): Application of a neural network technique to rainfall–runoff modelling. 
J. Hydrol. 199, 272–294. 
Shamseldin, A.Y., O’Connor, K.M., 1999 : A real-time combination method for the outputs of 
different rainfall–runoff models.Hydrol. Sci. J. 44 (6), 895–912 
Singh, S. K.(2010): Robust Parameter Estimation in Gauged and Ungauged Basins, Ph.D. 
dissertation No. 198, University of Stuttgart. 
Vandewiele, G.L., Xu, C.Y., Huybrechts, W., 1991: Regionalisation of physically based water  
balance models in Belgium: application to ungauged catchments.Water Resour. Manage. 5, 
199–208. 
Wagener, T., Wheater, H.S., Gupta, H.V., (2004): Rainfall-Runoff Modelling in Gauged and 
Ungauged Catchments. Imperial College Press, London p. 300. 
 
 
235 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
IMPACT OF CLIMATE CHANGE ON TEMPORAL VARIATION OF FLOODS IN 
BANGLADESH 
 
 
Md. Shahjahan Ali1, Tanziha Mahjabin2* and Takashi Hosoda3 
 
 
ABSTRACT: Bangladesh is a disaster prone country, and the effect of climate change magnifies 
the governing factors of the disasters. In this paper, firstly the temporal changes of pattern of 
different disasters in Bangladesh are discussed based on their occurrence rate, number of people 
killed, and exposure to human and economic loss. The paper is mainly concentrated on temporal 
variation of floods in Bangladesh. The decadal change in return period and probability of low, 
moderate and high flood events are presented. The term ‘Flood Intensity Index (FII)’ is 
introduced to characterize the flood, which is considered as a function of inundation depth and 
duration. Flood Intensity Index is calculated for two mega floods of 1988 and 1998. It is observed 
that although the average depth of inundation among two mega floods does not differ too much, 
the Flood Intensity Index in 1998 was much higher (about double) than 1988 flood, and that is 
why the economic loss in 1998 flood was much higher (about 2.33 times) than that of  1988 
flood. Previous data and various future predictions showed that both the parameters in Food 
Intensity Index are in increasing trend due to climate change impact. The climate change induced 
increament in river discharge during monsoon will increase the inundation depth, and the 
increasing trend of Sea Level Rise will increase the duration of flood due to back water effect of 
sea. Therefore, the Flood Intensity Index will significantly be increased due to climate change. 
Since, the ‘Flood Intensity Index (FII)’ is a measurable index to characterize a flood accounting 
all the impacts of climate change, this index can be used in expressing the change in flooding 
scenario due to climate change. 
 
1. Introduction 
Bangladesh is one of the biggest deltas in the world and have an area of 1,44,000 sq. km. 
Geographically, Bangladesh is situated at the tip of a funnel, through which huge amount of rain 
water discharged in monsoon to the ocean flushing over the country. Depression on the ocean, 
cyclones, tides and storm surges can easily affect the country through the unprotected shore. 
Therefore, Bangladesh is a disaster prone country. Effect of Climate Change magnifies the 
                                                        
1Associate Professor, Civil Engineering Department, Khulna University of Engineering and Technology, 
Khulna-9203, Bangladesh, e-mail: bablu41@yahoo.com 
2Graduate Student, Civil Engineering Department, Khulna University of Engineering and Technology, 
Khulna-9203, Bangladesh, e-mail: tanzihamahjabintrina@ymail.com 
3Professor, Department of Urban Management, Kyoto University, Kyoto 615-8540, Japan,  e-mail: 
hosoda@mbox.kudpc.kyoto-u.ac.jp 
 
 
 
236 
governing factors of disasters. The coastal belt of Bay of Bengal is in the south of Bangladesh. 
Among its 230 rivers, the Ganges, the Brahmaputra and the Meghna are the major rivers. They 
have vast catchment area (about 1.72 million km2), whose only 7.5% lies within Bangladesh. 
Bangladesh experienced flood about every year. Generally 20% of the country is inundated in a 
normal flood, the highest flood inundates close to 100,000 km2 in 1998. Since 1970, about 41 
million people became homeless and it is estimated that it will be 68 million till 2020. In this 
paper, firstly the temporal changes of pattern of different disasters in Bangladesh are discussed 
based on their occurrence rate, number of people killed, and exposure to human and economic 
loss. The paper is mainly concentrated on temporal variation of floods in Bangladesh. The 
decadal change in return period and probability of low, moderate and high flood events are 
presented. The term ‘Flood Intensity Index (FII)’ is introduced to characterize the flood, which is 
considered as a function of inundation depth and duration. A heuristic approach is described to 
explain how the climate change will magnify the flood intensity index of this country. 
 
2. Data 
Three types of data is used in this study:  i) the rainfall data, ii) the river discharge and flood 
hydrograph data and iii) time series of disasters in Bangladesh.  For the first one monthly 
rainfall records of 17 stations (out of which, complete set of data was available in 12 stations) of 
Bangladesh for fifty years (1958–2007) are collected from Bangladesh Meteorological 
Department. For this data, homogeneity of rainfall records are analyzed by Shahid (2009), and 
reported that the data of all the stations are homogeneous. The data on time series of historical 
floods in Bangladesh with inundation area are collected from Bangladesh flood forcasting and 
warning center (FFWC). The disaster related data were collected from OFDA/CRED 
International Disaster Database (http://www.em-dat.net), Université Catholique de Louvain, 
Brussels, Belgium. 
 
3. ANALYSIS AND DISCUSSION 
3.1 Disaster Profile of Bangladesh 
The main three disasters of Bangladesh are flood, cyclone and drought. Based on the Global Asse
ssment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction of United Nations in 2009, the world ranking of Bangl
adesh according to the total affected people and economic loss in different disasters is shown in T
able 1. It is observed that the Flood is the mostly devastating disaster in Bangladesh compared to 
other disasters as it ranked 1st for the case of population exposed and 3rd in the case of economic
exposure. 
 
Table 1 Different types of disasters and the world ranking of Bangladesh (UN, 2009) 
(a) Human exposure 
Disaster Type Population exposed World ranking 
Flood 19,279,660 1st out of 162 countries 
Cyclone 4,641,060 6th out of 89 countries 
Drought 642227 63rd out of 184 countries 
 
 
237 
(b)  Economic exposure 
 
 
 
 
 
          
          
Figure 1 Comparison of affected people in different disasters between disaster year (a) 1900-1981 
and (b) 1982-2011 
 
Available disaster data from 1900 to 2011 was devided  into two time spans 1900-1981 (1st 
span) and 1982-2011 (2nd span), and their comparative nature is compared in Fig. 1. It is 
observed that the number and pattern of disasters in the two time spans are varied significantly. In 
earlier time span, the number of disaster was about 1 number per year, and that number increased 
to about 6.7 in recent time span. In addition to that, new variety of disasters have been occured in 
recent past decades compared to that of before 1981. Although cyclone is the dominating disaster 
according to its number of yearly occurances with respect to others, its percent in 2nd span of 
time is reduced compared to 1st span of time. However, the percent of flood increased in recent 
years (1982-2011) compared to past decades. The yearly no of people killed by natural disasters 
Disaster Type GDP exposed       World ranking 
Flood  9.74 bill. USD 3rd out of 162 countries 
Cyclone 2.36 bill. USD 12th out of 89 countries 
(a) 
(b) 
 
 
238 
is reduced by about 5 times in recent decades compared to 1st time span. That may be due to the 
improvement of management and communication facility of the country. In time span 1900-1981, 
the main cause of people killed was drought whereas killed due to cyclone and flood was very 
little compared to drought. But in the time span 1982-2011, the dominating disaster for people 
killed was storm (about 92%). Affected people per year was about 7 times higher in 1982-2011 
than 1900-1981 span, and people mostly affected by flood in both spans, though the percentage is 
increasing day by day. Yearly affected people due to storm and drought is slightly decreasing 
during both cases. 
 
The pie charts of Fig. 2 shows that in the recent time span 1982-2011, total economic loss was 
16.9 billion where average economic loss was 563 mil./yr which was 38% higher than the past 
decades, though the liable disasters for economic loss was almost same. As the number of 
disasters has been increased in recent decades, the affected people and economic loss have also 
increased. In this case also, the dominating disaster is mostly flood and next is storm. 
        
(a) Disaster Year 1900-1981        (b) Disaster Year 1982-2011 
Figure 2 Comparison of economic loss in disasters between year 1900-1981 and 1982-2011 
 
Table 2 Summary of the comparison of disaster parameters 
Disaster Parameters 1900-1981 1982-2011 
Events/Year 0.91 6.7 
No. of people killed/Year 29,600 6,000 
Affected people/Year 1.5 Million 10.3 Million 
Economic loss/year 15 Mil. USD 563 Mil. USD 
 
The summary of disaster parameters for two time spans is shown in Table 2. Disaster nos., 
number of affected people and economic loss increases with time in an alarming rate. 
 
 
 
239 
3.2 Contribution of Territorial Rainfall and River Discharge on Floods of Bangladesh  
Bangladesh has a tropical climate dominated primarily by monsoon and partly by pre-monsoon 
and post-monsoon circulations. The annual average precipitation is about 2,300 mm, varying 
from as little as 1,200 mm in the west to over 5,000 mm in the east. It enjoys four different 
seasons namely: pre-monsoon (March to May), monsoon (June to September), post-monsoon 
(October to November) and winter (December to February). The seasonal variation of rainfall 
is very high. The scenario in the variation of river discharge is much more severe.  
 
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
100
200
300
400
Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec
D
is
ch
ar
ge
 (x
 1
04
cu
m
ec
)
R
ai
nf
al
l (
m
m
)
Month
Mean Monthly Rainfall (1975-2004)
Mean Monthly Rainfall (1975-2004)
Mean Monthly Discharge (1975-2004)
  
Figure 3 Ganges basin mean monthly rainfall and mean monthly discharge at Hardinge bridge 
point of Ganges river (Source: Jian et al., 2009) 
 
Figure 4 Corellation between Rainfall and Flood in the country 
Figure 4 shows the comparison of Monsoon rainfall anomaly with that of flooding area. The 
anomaly is defined as the percent deviation of a parameter from its temporal mean value. It is 
observed that for more than 85% cases, the flood anomaly is in phase with that of territorial 
rainfall. Although it is expected that the huge upstream flow has a high impact on floods of 
Bangladesh, such scenario is observed only for 15% cases. In the figure the 1998 flood shows 
 
 
240 
such a case. 
    
0
2
4
6
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
D
isc
ha
rg
e (
x 
10
4
m
3 /s
)
Month
Brahmaputra
Ganges
 
Figure 5 Time lag between Peak Discharges in Ganges and Brahmaputra River Hydrograph 
 
  Figure 5 compares the mean monthly discharge at Hardinge Bridge Point of Ganges river and 
that of Bahadurabad point of Brahmaputra river. It shows that it has very high discharge in 
monsoon, mainly July to September. The discharge curve is found to be lagged by months to the 
rainfall curve. Since the discharge in the river is highly influenced by the huge upstream flow 
outside the country, it is not expected to show a definite relationship between rainfall and river 
discharge pattern. But the figure that prepared averaging 20 years data, show similar pattern in 
curve between rainfall and discharge for Ganges Basin. It is important to mention that the annual 
cycles of discharge in Brahmaputra river indicates significant phase differences with Ganges. The 
Brahmaputra flow increases rapidly in late spring and peak at mid of July, ahead of the Ganges 
by about two months, probably for two reasons: firstly, due to extreme human activity in Ganges 
basin, plus the different basin time-scales; Second, rains generally occur in Assam (to the 
northeast of Bangladesh) some weeks earlier than over the Ganges catchment (Lawrence and 
Webster, 2002). The phase difference in the rising limb of their hydrograph is 1.5 months. 
Probably, this is the reason for which most of the annual flood hyetographs show double peaks: in 
July and end of Aug. If the Brahmaputra does not discharge out its peak flow rapidly, its peak will 
coincide with the peak of Ganges, it will cause an extreme high flood. 
 
3.3  Visible Impact of Climate Change on Floods 
3.3.1  Increase of Brahmaputra River Discharge  
Figure 6 shows the temporal variation of mean seasonal discharge at Bahadurabad point of 
Brahmaputra river for wet and dry seasons seperately. It is found that in both the seasons, the 
discharge is increasing with time. In wet season, the yearly increasing rate of Brahmaputra river 
discharge is about 54 cumec and that of dry season is about 114 cumec. The discharge has been 
increased about 7.5% in last 50 years. The fluctuation in the variation of monsoon discharge is 
1.5 months 
 
 
241 
also increased. The variation of averaged monthly discharge for two averaging time spans 1956-
1980 and 1981-2005 is compared in Fig. 7. The Averaged monthly Brahmaputra discharge in 
Bangladesh is increased about 8% in 50 years. 
 
Figure 6 Temporal change of discharge in Brahmaputra River for wet and dry seasons 
 
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
60000
Ja
nu
ary
Fe
bru
ary
Ma
rch Ap
ril
Ma
y
Ju
ne Ju
ly
Au
gu
st
Se
pte
mb
e
Oc
tob
er
No
ve
mb
er
De
ce
mb
er
25
 y
ea
rs
 A
vg
. M
on
th
ly
 D
is
ch
ar
ge
 (c
um
ec
)
1956-1980
1981-2005
 
Figure 7 Monthly variation of Brahmaputra River Discharge in two time span 
3.3.2   Change in the trend of historical floods and rainfalls in Bangladesh 
The historical time series of floods in Bangladesh shows that the top 5 floods in terms of 
inundated area are occurred in last 20 years in 60 years of history (Fig. 8). 1998 Flood is the most 
devastating flood, inundation was close to 67% that displaced more than 30 million people with 
20 million homeless; estimated damage was 2.8 billion USD. On the other hand, the second 
ranked flood was in1988, where 61% of the area was inundated; estimated damage was 1.2 
billion USD. Although the inundation area in 1998 flood is about 6% higher than 1988, the 
estimated damage is 2.33 times higher. The cause behind this is explained under next 
y = 0.114x + 9.125 
y=0.054x + 35.22 
 
 
242 
subheadings in detail. 
0
20000
40000
60000
80000
100000
120000
1954 1956 1961 1963 1965 1967 1969 1971 1973 1975 1977 1980 1983 1985 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008
Year
A
re
a 
(s
q.
 k
m
)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
%
 o
f t
ot
al
 A
re
a
 
Figure 8 Time series of historical floods in Bangladesh with inundation area 
 
   Inundation to the extent of 20% area of the country is beneficial for crops and ecological 
balance (Annual Flood Report, 2008). But the flood more than 20% cause direct and indirect 
damages and considerable inconveniences to the people. From Fig. 8, it is also evident that the 
extreme flood events in terms of inundation area are also increased in recent years. During 
1954~1972, the yearly flooding area was quite uniform, after that year to year fluctuation in 
flooding area is very high. It is observed that the number of moderate floods are decreased highly 
and they are converted to either extreme high floods or the extreme low floods. Evidence of such 
extreme events and rapid change of flood intensity indicates the effect of climate change.  
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
1958 1960 1962 1964 1966 1968 1970 1972 1974 1976 1978 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008
Year
M
on
so
on
 R
ai
nf
al
l (
m
m
)
 
Figure 9 Time series of Monsoon rainfall in Bangladesh 
   Figure 9 shows the time series of monsoon rainfall over Bangladesh for a period of 1958 to 
2008. If we draw a trend line for these 50 years of rainfall data, it can be found that the monsoon 
rainfall increases very gently as 2.65 mm/year. Many researchers explain it as the probable 
impact of climate change, which is also match with the prediction of 3rd IPCC report. From the 
figure it is also observed that the rainfall over Bangladesh in 1998 is about 6% lower than that of 
1988, although in 1998 the flooding area was 6% higher than 1988. Reasonably, the rainfall at 
upstream also plays a role in inundating the country. 
 
3.3.3   Impact of Climate change on the Return period and frequency of floods 
To analyze the temporal change of return period and probability of floods, the floods were 
classified into three catagories: low, moderate and high flood events. In this study the moderate 
 
 
243 
flood events were defined as the mean flooding area of a period ± 5%. Considering time series of 
flooding area from 1954 to 2008, the moderate flood events were found as 19% to 29% area 
flooding of the country. Therefore, the low flood means <19% and high flood means >29% area 
flooding events. To show the temporal change, the data set was divided into two time spans: 
1954-1981 and 1982-2008. From the two sets of data as shown in Fig. 10, it is observed that, in 
high flood events (Inundation > 29% area), the return period decreased and the probability 
increased by about 3 times in recent decades. In low flood events (Inundation <19% area), the 
return period decreased in recent decades and the probability increased by about 1.4 times. In 
Moderate Flood events (Inundation =19 - 29% area), the return period increased and the 
probability is reduced to about half (1/2). 
 
   
Figure 10 Return period and probability of flood 
 
Figure 11 Increase of number of occurrence of characteristic flood over the historical years at 
Bahadurabad 
 
Considering a particular example of flood at Bahadurabad point of Brahmaputra river with discha
rge = 76,137 m3/s, for data set of 1956 to 2007, it is found that the probability of occurrence of th
 
 
244 
e characteristic flood is increased from 4% to 28% over the last 50 years. Figure 11 shows the inc
rease of number of occurrence of the characteristic flood over the three equal durations.   
 
3.4 Impact of Climate Change on the Intensity of Flood 
3.4.1 Conceptual Model to Explain the Climate Change Impact on Flood 
We know the main causes of flood in Bangladesh are excessive precipitation, low topography and 
flat slope of the country. Among others, the frequent development of low pressure areas and 
storm surges in the Bay of Bengal can impede drainage, and the severity of flooding is greatest 
when the peak floods of the major rivers coincide with these effects.  
 
IWM (2009) predicted that, by the year 2100, the temperature will be increased about 2.40C, the 
monsoon precipitation will be increased about 11.8% and the SLR will be 30cm ~ 1 m (9 cm ~ 88 
cm by IPCC). They also predicted that, for 20C temperature rise and 10% increase in 
precipitation, the discharge in Ganges river will be increased about 19%, that of Brahmaputra 
will be increased about 13%, and about 11% discharge will be increased in Meghna river. That 
means, on an average, 10 to 20% discharge will be increased in all the three mighty rivers in 
Bangladesh by the year 2100 with a significant amount of SLR. 
 
 
Figure 12 Impact of climate change over flood 
To explain the long term effect of climate change on flooding scenario of Bangladesh, an index 
named Flood Intensity Index is introduced here to characterize the intensity of flood. Flood 
Intensity Index is defined as the product of the depth of flood above the danger level (m) and the 
duration of flood (days). A conceptual model to explain the impact of climate change on the 
flooding scenario of Bangladesh is presented in Fig. 12. It shows that due to increase of river 
discharge, the inundation depth will be increased; on the other hand, due to Sea Level Rise there 
will be drainage congestion to drain out the river water to the sea due to back water effect of 
higher elevated sea level. This will cause the slow down of rate of discharging river water to the 
Sea, which will actually influence to prolong the duration of flood. Since both the parameters of 
flood intensity index will be increased by the impact of climate change, the intensity of flood will 
also be increased significantly. An example of calculating Flood Intensity Index is given below. 
 
 
245 
3.4.2  Calculation of Flood Intensity Index 
In this section, the flood intensity index is calculated for 1998 and 1988 floods and compared 
with a normal flooding year 2008. The water level above the danger level during flood is termed 
here as inundation depth. Figure 13 shows the comparison of inundation depths in 1998 and 1988 
floods with normal flooding year 2008 for some locations in Brahmaputra basin. Figure 15 shows 
the same for some locations in Ganges basin.  In a same flood, the depth of inundation shows 
different trend in different Basins. Comparing the trend of inundation depth between 1988 and 
1998 flood in Ganges basin for some locations, it is found that the average flooding depth in 1998 
flood is little bit higher than 1988 flood. On the other hand, in most of the locations of 
Brahmaputra basin, the inundation depth of 1998 flood is less than 1988 flood. On an average, it 
can be concluded that, the flooding depth between 1988 and 1998 flood did not differ much.   
0
1
2
3
Ku
rig
ram
 
Ch
ilm
ari
 
Ba
ha
du
rab
ad
 
Se
raj
ga
nj 
Ar
ich
a 
Ja
ma
lpu
r 
My
me
ns
ing
h 
Dh
ak
a 
Na
ray
an
ga
nj 
Ta
rag
ha
t 
W
at
er
 d
ep
th
 a
bo
ve
 D
an
ge
r L
ev
el
 (m
)
2008 (Normal Flood) 1998 1988
 
Figure 13 Comparison of inundation depth in 1998 and 1988 floods with normal flooding year 
2008 for some locations in Brahmaputra basin 
 
   Figures 14 and 16 show the comparison of durations of inundation in 1998 and 1988 floods 
for several locations in Brahmaputra basin and Ganges basin, respectively. From the figures it is 
found that the durations of flood at most of the locations in both Brahmaputra and Ganges rivers 
are much higher in 1998 than 1988 flood. The durations of flood in 1998 were 3.88 times higher 
in Jamalpur (Old Brahmaputra), 3.3 times higher in Mymensingh (Old Brahmaputra), 2.5 times 
higher in Dhaka (Buriganga), 2.4 times higher in Bahadurabad (Brahmaputra) and 1.7 times 
higher in Goalanda (Ganges) than that of 1988 flood. If we compare Figs. 13 and 14, most of the 
places the inundation depth in 1998 is seen less than 1988 but the duration of flood in 1998 is 
found much higher than 1988. Therefore it can be concluded that, although the depth of 
inundation among two floods does not differ too much, the duration of flood in 1998 was much 
(up to 4 times) higher than 1988 flood.  
 
   Figure 17 shows the calculated Flood Intensity Index for different basins and their averages 
for years 1988, 1998 and 2008. It shows that although the depth of inundation among two mega 
floods does not differ too much, the Flood Intensity Index in 1998 was much higher (about 
double) than 1988 flood, that is due to the prolong duration of flood in 1998 than 1988 flood.   
 
 
 
246 
30
22
66
48
68
31 33
57
71 66
16 15
27
44
31
8 10
23
36
65
0
20
40
60
80
100
Ku
rig
ram
 
Ch
ilm
ari
 
Ba
ha
du
rab
ad
 
Se
raj
ga
nj 
Ar
ich
a 
Ja
ma
lpu
r 
My
me
ns
ing
h 
Dh
ak
a 
Na
ray
an
ga
nj 
Ta
rag
ha
t 
N
o.
 o
f D
ay
s 
fo
r W
L 
ab
ov
e 
D
L 2008 (Normal Flood) 1998 1988
 
Figure 14 Comparison of durations of inundation in 1998 and 1988 floods with normal fl
ood year 2008 for some locations in Brahmaputra basin 
0
1
2
3
Dinajpur Rajshahi Hardinge Bridge Goalundo Bhagyakul Gorai Rly Bridge 
W
at
er
 d
ep
th
 a
bo
ve
 D
an
ge
r L
ev
el
 (m
)
2008 (Normal Flood) 1998 1988
 
Figure 15 Comparison of inundation depth in 1998 and 1988 floods with normal flooding
 year 2008 for some locations in Ganges basin. 
 
4. Conclusions 
 
Although the paper is mainly concentrated on temporal variation of floods in Bangladesh, the 
temporal changes of pattern of other disasters in Bangladesh are also discussed and compared 
with flood based on their occurrence rate, number of people killed, exposure to human and 
economic loss. Based on the analysis, following conclusions are made: 
. 
 Comparing the disaster parameters for two time spans, it is found that the disaster nos., 
number of affected people and economic loss increases with time in an alarming rate. It is 
observed that the flood is the mostly devastating disaster in Bangladesh compared to other 
disasters as it ranked 1st in the world for the case of population exposed and 3rd in the case 
of economic exposure. 
 
 
247 
 Since the discharge in the river is highly influenced by the huge upstream flow outside the 
country, it is not expected to show a definite relationship between rainfall and river 
discharge pattern. But the 30 years average discharge curve of Ganges river is found to be 
similar pattern of rainfall (in Ganges Basin within Bangladesh) lagged by a months. 
Comparing 50 years data of rainfall anomaly with flood, it is observed that for more than 
85% cases, the flood anomaly of Bangladesh is in phase with that of territorial rainfall 
anomaly. 
 
3
28 27
68
72
25
4
24 23
41
47
25
0
20
40
60
80
100
Dinajpur Rajshahi Hardinge Bridge Goalundo Bhagyakul Gorai Rly Bridge 
No
. o
f D
ay
s 
fo
r W
L 
ab
ov
e 
D
L
2008 (Normal Flood) 1998 1988
 
Figure 16 Comparison of inundation depth in 1998 and 1988 floods with normal flooding year 
2008 for some locations in Ganges basin 
 
Figure 17 Comparison of Flood Intensity Index of 1998 and 1988 floods with normal flooding 
year 2008 for Ganges and Brahmaputra basin. 
 
 In wet season, the yearly increasing rate of Brahmaputra river discharge is about 54 cumec 
and that of dry season is about 114 cumec. The Brahmaputra discharge at Bahaduarabad 
point  has been increased about 7.5% in last 50 years.  
 The historical time series of floods in Bangladesh shows that the top 5 floods in terms of 
inundation area are occurred in last 20 years in 60 years of history. It is observed that the 
 
 
248 
number of moderate floods are decreased highly and they are converted to either extreme 
high floods or the extreme low floods. From the trend line for 50 years of rainfall data, it is 
found that the monsoon rainfall increases very gently as 2.65 mm/year. These changing 
phenomena in rainfall and flooding scenario in Bangladesh can be explain as the probable 
impact of climate change. 
 The term ‘Flood Intensity Index (FII)’ is introduced to characterize the flood, which is 
considered as a function of inundation depth and duration. Flood Intensity Index is 
calculated for two mega floods of 1988 and 1998. It is observed that although the average 
depth of inundation among two mega floods does not differ too much, the Flood Intensity 
Index in 1998 was much higher (about double) than 1988 flood, and that is why the 
economic loss in 1998 flood was much higher (about 2.33 times) than that of  1988 flood. 
 
Previous data and various future predictions showed that both the parameters in Food Intensity 
Index are in increasing trend due to climate change impact. The climate change induced 
increament in river discharge during monsoon will increase the inundation depth, and the 
increasing trend of Sea Level Rise will increase the duration of flood due to back water effect of 
sea. Therefore, the Flood Intensity Index will significantly be increased due to climate change. 
Since, the ‘Flood Intensity Index (FII)’ is a measurable index to characterize a flood accounting 
all the impacts of climate change, this index can be used in expressing the change in flooding 
scenario due to climate change. 
 
References 
 
Ali, A. (2000). “Vulnerability of Bangladesh Coastal Region to Climate Change with Adaptation 
Option”. Bangladesh Space Research and Remote Sensing Organization (SPARRSO), Dhaka.  
Jian. J., Webster PJ, and Hoyos. C.D. (2009). “Large scale controls on ganes and brahmaputra 
river disscharge on intraseasonal and seasonal time scale”. Q. J. R. Meteorol. Soc. 135: 353–
370. 
Lawrence DM. and Webster PJ. (2002). “The boreal summer intraseasonal oscillation: 
Relationship between northward and eastward movement of convection’. J. Atmos. Sci. 59: 
1593–1606. 
Shahid. S. (2009). “Rainfall variability and the trends of wet and dry periods in Bangladesh”. 
International Journal of Climatology, Published online in Wiley Inter Science 
(www.interscience.wiley.com) DOI: 10.1002/joc.2053 
Annual Flood Report (2008). Flood Forcasting and Warning Center (FFWC), Bangladesh Water 
Developement Board, Dhaka, Bangladesh. (website, www.ffwc.gov.bd ) 
EM-DAT (2011) The OFDA/CRED International Disaster Database http://www.em-dat.net 
Université Catholique de Louvain - Brussels - Belgium. 
UN (2009) Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction, UN International Strategy for 
Disaster Reduction, Geneva, http://www.preventionweb.net/english/hyogo/gar/report/ 
World Bank (2000). “Bangladesh: Climate Change & Sustainable Development”. Report No. 
21104 BD, Dhaka.  
249 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
AN ANALYSIS OF EXISTING WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM TO MINIMIZE HEALTH 
RISK HAZARD IN THE MONGOLIAN GER AREA 
 
 
Shahriar Shams1, Takashi Honda2 and Sadia Chowdhury3 
 
 
Abstract: The quality of drinking water is closely associated with human health, and providing 
safe drinking water is a major public health priority. Every year an average of 3.4 million people 
(mostly children under 5 years old in developing countries) are dying as a result of water-related 
diseases. Over 2 million deaths a year are attributed to unsafe water, mostly due to waterborne 
diarrheal diseases. Thus, the provision of safe drinking water and proper sanitation will have a 
dramatic impact on public health and the lives of millions all over the world. This paper 
highlights the analysis of existing water supply system in the targeted area of Khoroo # 13   in 
Sukhbaatar district, Mongolia. The study area has a population over 7,000 and most of its growth 
is now concentrated in ger housing area, raising concern for public health. The study aims at 
determining bacteriological and chemical quality of drinking water at the source and point of use 
in order to figure out possible contamination points and to identify the possible pathways of 
disease transmission and prevention, to minimize health risk for the residents in the ger area. 
 
Keywords: Ger, health, sanitation, water supply. 
 
1.   Introduction 
 
Rapidly growing water demands in the agriculture, industry, and household sectors have led to 
increasing concerns about a ‘Global Water Crisis’. This rapidly increasing demand for water 
particularly in developing countries is an obvious obstacle to sustainability. Conversely the 
urgent necessity for its provision is similarly an obstacle with short term solutions often leading 
to serious long term problems (Gray, 2006). The problems are very acute in densely populated 
informal or slum areas of developing countries. The main drivers for increasing water demands 
are growing populations, increasing urbanization and economic growth. Urbanisation is occurring 
throughout the developing world at alarming rate and by 2025 over 50% of the world’s 
population will be urban dwellers (UNCHS, 2001). Many of these urban dwellers who are poor 
will end up in slums having little access to basic services such as safe drinking water and 
                                                
1Assistant Professor, Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Islamic University of 
Technology (IUT), Board Bazar, Bangladesh. 
2Special Advisor, Disaster Management Division 2, Water Resources and Disaster Management Group, 
Global Environment Department, JICA HQ, Tokyo, Japan. 
3Lecturer, Department of Science of Dental Materials, Pioneer Dental College, Dhaka, Bangladesh. 
 
250 
 
sanitation posing risks to health hazards (McMichael, 2000; Karn and Harada, 2002). In Kenya, 
for example, only 5 per cent of poor households have a residential water supply. In the slums of 
Nairobi, 19 per cent of the populations have household connections (Gulyani and Talukdar, 
2008). The increase in urbanisation and its disproportionate concentration in informal settlements 
are the major challenges for the expansion of water and sanitation services (WSS). The quality of 
drinking water is closely associated with human health, and providing safe drinking water is a 
major public health priority. However, the problem of water quality, namely the lack of clean, 
safe drinking water, even in countries where water is abundant, is one of the most serious 
challenges of our time. Approximately 1.1 billion people lack access to safe water and 2.6 billion 
are without adequate sanitation (UNDP, 2006). By the year 2025, about 3 billion population will 
face water stress (Rosegrant et al., 1997). Many of these people will live within the mega cities in 
peri-urban slum areas in the vicinity of mega cities and the problem of finding sufficient water 
sources will become acute (Jalil and Njiru, 2010). 
 
The population served with improved water supply in developing countries has increased by 9% 
during the last 15 years (WHO/UNICEF 2004). Looking at the 20 leading risk factors for health 
burden in developing regions, unsafe water, sanitation and poor hygiene are ranked third. 
Inadequate water supply at home and public places erodes human dignity, undermines 
development, and causes disease. Deterioration of water supplies and sanitation leads to a decline 
in urban living conditions. Residents of peri-urban and remote rural areas with poor water 
treatment and delivery systems are at risk. Water, sanitation and health are inseparably linked. 
The key factors for the prevention of water borne diseases are adequate and portable water, 
sanitation and personal hygiene. Every year an average of 3.4 million people (mostly children 
under 5 years old in developing countries) are dying as a result of water-related diseases (WHO, 
2002). Over 2 million deaths a year are attributed to unsafe water, mostly due to waterborne 
diarrheal diseases. Ninety percent of those who die from diarrheal diseases are children in 
developing countries (Elimelech, 2006). Thus, the provision of safe drinking water and proper 
sanitation will have a dramatic impact on public health and the lives of millions all over the 
world.  
 
Surveillance programmes are the most effective when target groups are selected based on the 
vulnerability to public health risks having access to poor water supply, as it is within these groups 
that greatest public health gain can be achieved often through relatively low cost interventions 
(Howard and Bartram, 2005). This paper highlights the analysis of water supply system in ger 
area of Mongolia. The ger is a portable, circular, tent-like dwelling favoured by nomadic herders 
and is regarded as a movable property because it is not fixed to the soil (Takashi and Shams, 
2004). It is an indigenous concept for community housing and it developed in a traditional way. 
Under the socialist rule, the poverty was really not an issue of concern but after the fall of 
socialism the economy collapsed, substantial intra migration took place and people’s income 
generation reduced considerably giving rise to poverty leading to unplanned growth in the form 
of gers.  
 
This study was aimed to find out the possible way to overcome existing problems of the drinking 
water supply in the targeted areas in the district of Sukhbaatar. The city Khoroo # 13   in 
Sukhbaatar  district has a population over 7,000 and most of its growth is now concentrated in ger 
housing area, raising concern for public health due to lack of adequate water supply and 
sanitation. In the ger area, infectious diseases including diarrhea and other water borne diseases 
251 
 
are seriously affecting health of the residents. The study aims at determining bacteriological and 
chemical quality of drinking water at the source and point of use in order to figure out possible 
contamination points and to identify the possible pathways of disease transmission and 
prevention, to minimize health risk hazards for the residents in the ger area. 
 
2.  Methodology  
 
This baseline survey was conducted using random sampling methods for bacteriological and 
chemical analysis. As for the sample collection, a total number of 120 households who have the 
children under the age of five were randomly selected, and interviewed. The bacteriological and 
chemical examination was conducted on 120 drinking water samples, which were collected from 
water storage containers in the addressed households. Water samples were collected in a sterile 
500 ml bottle and transported to the laboratory at ambient temperature within 2 hours. Water 
samples were tested on total bacteria count, total coliforms, and nitrogen containing chemicals: 
ammonia, nitrate and nitrite, total dissolved solids, chloride ion, pH, free chlorine residue and 
iron.  Bacteriological indexes were determined by the national standard methods MNS 
4696:1998, MNS (ISO) 4698:1998 and MNS 6340-2003. Nitrogen containing chemicals were 
analyzed by spectrophotometer method.          
 
3. The Study Area  
 
The study was conducted in Khoroo of Sukhbaatar district # 13, Mongolia. The study area was 
selected on the basis of insufficient water supply and sanitation services leading to higher 
prevalence of infectious diseases as compared to the other area. A total number of 620 residents 
(120 households) from Khoroo in Sukhbaatar district #13 were covered by the survey. Gender 
structure of the respondents was 48.5 percent males and 51.5 percent females respectively and 
over 60 percent of the households consist of 4-6 members. A half of the surveyed respondents 
were the age between 18 and 59 and one quarter of them were children under the age of 5, and 
those approximately 30 percent were attending kinder garden. In terms of monthly household 
income, the households in the Sukhbaatar earn less than 29, 000 MNT (21 US$). 
 
3.1 Water supply  
 
3.1.1. Water Sources  
 
Water supply to ger residents can be categorized into following group; truck delivery to kiosks, 
kiosks connected to a piped network, private wells, use of river and springs. In Sukhbaatar 
district, 60.8 percent of the surveyed households collect drinking water from water kiosk 
delivered by trucks, and other water sources for the residents were as follow, the water kiosk 
connected to piped network in the other area (24.2 %), the dug well (7.5 %), the spring (5.8 %) 
and the borehole (1.7 %) as shown in Figure 1. Main water sources for the households in the 
Sukhbaatar district were non-centralized communal water kiosks. However, some do not use the 
kiosk, the reasons were as follow; long distance (42.8%), irregular working hour (35.7%) and 
other reasons (35.7%) as shown in Table 1. In the Sukhbaatar district, about 80 percent of the 
surveyed households collect water from a distance within 500 meters while the rest have to travel 
over 500 meters to collect water. An average distance to water source was 360 meter. 77.5 
percent of the household of classified their drinking water as “good”, 20 percent as “satisfactory” 
252 
 
and 2.5 percent as “poor”. 41.7-45.8 % of the surveyed households’ responded that children are 
usually responsible for collecting and storing water. They collect water through containers and 
travel over distances from 250 to over 500 meters. 
 
 
Figure 1 Types of water sources in Sukhbaatar district. 
 
Table 1 Water supply and water consumption and handling. 
 
Household  no.(%) Variable 
Khoroo#13 
Sukhbaatar district 
Water kiosk connected to centralized pipeline 29 (24.2) 
Water kiosk filled by tanker truck 73 (60.8) 
Borehole 2 (1.7) 
Dug well 6 (5.0) 
Drinking water 
source 
Spring 7 (5.8) 
Far distance to water kiosk 6 (42.8) 
Irregular operation of water kiosk 5 (35.7) 
High price of water 1 (7.1) 
Reason of using 
spring and dug well 
Other 5 (35.7) 
Depth of dug well Average (m) 3.5-4.7 
Up to 250m 49 (40.8) 
251-500m 47 (39.2) 
Distance to water 
source 
More than 501m 24 (20.0) 
Insufficiency in amount of water 62 (51.7) 
Not followed timetable 23 (19.2) 
Long waiting time  51 (42.5) 
Operation of water 
kiosk 
Normal 38 (31.7) 
Frequency of water Everyday 30 (25.0) 
253 
 
Twice a week 88 (73.3) 
Once a week 2 (1.7) 
fetching 
Average time for fetching water (minute) 31.6-50 
Metal 22 (18.3) 
Plastic 96 (80.0) 
Both type 2 (1.7) 
Covered 95 (79.2) 
Uncovered 25 (20.8) 
Wide necked 103 (85.8) 
Narrow necked 14 (11.7) 
Water storage 
container 
Both type 3 (2.5) 
By scooping up 105 (87.5) Way of taking out of 
water from container By pouring 15 (12.5) 
Within 3 days 53 (44.2) 
Within 7 days 59 (49.2) 
Cleaning frequency 
of water container 
More than 7 days 8 (6.7) 
By using water 74 (61.7) 
By using detergents 40 (33.3) 
Cleaning method 
By wiping inside of container 19 (15.8) 
Clean 66 (55.0) Cleanliness of water 
container Dirty 54 (45.0) 
 
3.1.2 Water quality  
The assessment of water quality is important for pollution control and protection of health. The 
risks to health hazard can be minimized significantly by ensuring standard quality of the drinking 
water. Water quality depends on the chemistry (pH), physical appearance (color, taste and odor, 
temperature, turbidity, floating matters and sediment mixture) and biological properties of the 
water. Drinking water should not be offensive in taste, odor and color and should be clear and 
without floating matters and other mixtures, complying the standard requirements for drinking 
water.   
 
The surveyed households were questioned on physical parameters of their drinking water. About 
44.2 percent of the households in the study area assessed the quality of drinking water as changed 
from normal. In particular, 40.8 percent of the households complained on taste and odour due to 
presence of chlorine in drinking water and 3.3 percent complained due to presence of rust in 
drinking water (Table 2).  
 
Table 2 The quality of drinking water by consumer perception. 
 
Households  n (%) Variable 
Khoroo#13 
Sukhbaatar district 
Changed 53 (44.2) 
Taste and odour of chlorine 49 (40.8) 
Rust and corrosion 4 (3.3) 
Changes in physical 
parameters of water 
quality 
No changes 67 (55.8) 
254 
 
The water quality parameters and contamination level for stored drinking water at households 
were compared by type of water source. The quality of stored water in the households varied 
depending on type of water source, from where the water was collected and the magnitude of 
contamination. A tendency that the water taken from dug well had higher total bacterial counts 
when compared with the water taken from water kiosk filled by truck and water kiosk connected 
to centralized pipeline was observed as shown in Table 3.  
 
Table 3: Results of bacteriological analyses of household stored water by type of    
              water source.  
 
Total bacteria count (1 ml) Total coliforms 
(100 ml) n (%) 
Water source Number of 
samples 
Average Standard 
Deviation 
(SD) 
Detected Not detected 
Water kiosk filled by 
truck 48 137.1 89.0 10 (20.8) 38 (79.2) 
Dug well 
 5 225.2 136.9 4 (80.0) 1 (20.0) 
Water kiosk 
connected to central 
pipeline 
7 103.3 76.7 0 7 (100.0) 
 
4. Results 
 
The survey was carried out for assessing existing water supply and sanitation, stake holder’s 
hygienic knowledge, and determining water quality in the targeted areas. Evaluation has been 
carried out based on the feedback obtained by the stake holders through statistical analysis and 
the results were interpreted in order to find linkage between the raw data and waterborne diseases 
among the surveyed population.  
 
The average amount of daily water consumption per head is found 6.9 litre in the Sukhbaatar 
districts which is considered to be three times lower than the average water consumption of 20 
litres (UNDP, 2006). Bacteriological and chemical analyses suggest that water which is stored in 
kiosks was free of contamination and the water in dug well was highly contaminated posing 
major health risk on water-borne diseases. The water quality analyses for chemical parameters 
met the national standard for drinking purpose (Table 4). The results of bacteriological analyses 
of the households in the study area indicated that average number of bacteria were in the range of 
140.5-192.6, which was exceeding the standard requirement by 7-9 times. Out of the all the 
sampled households, 93.3 percent of the drinking water had the bacterial counts, exceeding the 
standard level. According to the standard requirement, coliforms should not be detected in 100 ml 
of water. Regarding total coliforms, it was found that about 20.0 percent of the households’ water 
was contaminated. Distances to water sources and inadequately stored condition for the water are 
considered to be the reasons for deteriorating water quality in the households. Over 50 percent of 
the respondents cleaned the storage container only rinsing by water or without using any 
detergents.  
 
255 
 
Table 4 Results of bacteriological and chemical analyses of household stored drinking water.  
 
Sample, n (%)  
Variable Khoroo#13 
Sukhbaatar district 
Acceptable 
   level by 
the National 
  Standard 
 
p value 
Mean± SD 20 * Total bacteria count 
(1ml) Sample doesn’t 
meet standard 
140.5±94.7 
56(93.3)   
Detected 0  Total coliforms 
(100ml) Not detected 
14 (23.3) 
46 (76.7)   
Mean± SD 6.84±0.16 6.5-8.5 n.s. pH 
Sample doesn’t 
meet standard 
-   
Mean± SD 58.7±62.4 1000.0 * Total dissolved solids  
Sample doesn’t 
meet standard 
-   
Mean± SD 7.32±9.60 350.0 * Chloride 
Sample doesn’t 
meet standard 
-   
Mean± SD 0.3 n.s. Iron 
Sample doesn’t 
meet standard 
0.06±-0.10 
3 (2.5)   
Mean± SD 4.95±4.67 50.0 ** Nitrate 
Sample doesn’t 
meet standard 
-   
Mean± SD 0.007±0.015 1.0 n.s. Nitrite 
Sample doesn’t 
meet standard 
-   
Mean± SD 0.012±0.022 1.5 n.s. Ammonia 
Sample doesn’t 
meet standard 
-   
Mean± SD 0.008±0.028 0.3 n.s. Free chlorine residue 
Sample doesn’t 
meet standard 
- 
 
  
Anova test used. * p<0.05      ** p<0.005       *** p<0.000,  n.s. = national standard   
 
Free chlorine residue was not detected in dug well’s water. However, free chlorine residues were 
in higher amounts in water taken from water kiosk filled by truck than the water taken from water 
kiosk connected to a piped network. Result of chemical analysis of the households’ stored water 
by sources is shown in the Table 5. 
 
Depending on type of water source, total dissolved solids, chloride, iron, nitrite and nitrate were 
different in water taken from different sources.  However, other investigated parameters (pH, free 
chlorine residue and iron) were in the same level in all types of water sources.   In particular, 
water taken from dug well had relatively high amount of total dissolved solids and chloride 
compared to water taken from water kiosk filled by truck and water kiosk connected to 
256 
 
centralized pipeline. In water taken from water kiosk filled by truck, the contents of total 
dissolved solids and chloride were higher than that of the water taken from water kiosk connected 
to centralized pipeline. The iron content is the highest in water taken from dug well and it was 
detected in relatively lower in water from water kiosk filled by truck and water kiosk connected 
to centralized pipeline.    
    
Table 5 Results of chemical analyses of household stored water by type of water    
Source. 
Water kiosk filled by 
truck 
Dug well 
 
Water kiosk 
connected to 
central pipeline Parameter 
Sukhbaatar 
(n=48) 
Sukhbaatar 
(n=5) 
Sukhbaatar 
(n=7) 
 
P  
Value 
pH 6.8±0.1 6.5±0.1 6.8±0.1 n.s. 
Total dissolved 
solids  41.3±6.6 258.4±49.8 35.3±0.66 *** 
Chloride 4.7±0.8 36.9±12.2 3.71±0.63 *** 
Iron 0.05±0.09 0.18±0.14 0.02±0.02 * 
Free chlorine 
residue 0.009±0.03 0.000 0.001±0.003 n.s. 
Nitrite 0.004±0.009 0.040±0.010 0.001±0.001 *** 
Nitrate 4.2±3.4 16.0±1.0 1.52±1.21 *** 
Ammonia 0.01±0.02 0.03±0.03 0.004±0.011 n.s. 
 Anova test used. * p<0.05      ** p<0.005       *** p<0.000,  n.s. = national standard   
 
Ammonia in the environment originates from metabolic, agricultural, and industrial processes. 
Natural levels in surface and ground waters are usually below 0.2 mg/l. At levels above 1.5 mg/l, 
ammonia gives undesirable odour and taste to water. Therefore, the threshold concentration of 
ammonia for taste and odour standardized at the level of less than 1.5 mg/l in the drinking water 
standard.     
 
Nitrite and nitrate are naturally occurring ions that are part of the nitrogen cycle. Nitrite occurs in 
increased levels in domestic wastewater. WHO recommends the guideline value for nitrite is 
below 3.0 mg/l. The maximum of allowed nitrate in drinking water should not be exceed 50 mg/l. 
Drinking water with high nitrate and nitrite levels can cause health problem as methaemo 
globinaemia or  “blue baby” syndrome among children.  This can result into cyanosis (15% 
methaemoglobin concentration), headache, dizziness, muscular crams and weakness (30-45% 
methaemoglobin concentration) and vomiting, loss of consciousness and even death (60-70% 
methaemoglobin concentration) (Firkin et. al., 2002). 
  
Thus, ammonia, nitrate and nitrite, so called hydrogen containing compounds can have an 
adverse effect on water quality causing taste and odour problems apart from having toxic effect 
on health. Beside they can be indirect indicators of water pollution resulting from bacterial, 
sewage, and animal waste. In the metabolic process, ammonia, nitrate and nitrite arise as a result 
of decomposition of organic compounds so that they can indicate fecal contamination. During the 
metabolic process, ammonia arise first, then nitrite and nitrate, subsequently. According to 
hygiene norms, drinking water, contained ammonia, nitrite and nitrate below 0.1 mg/l, 0.002 
257 
 
mg/l, and 10 mg/l, respectively is considered as relatively “clean” water or is not contaminated by 
organic compounds.      
 
Among the surveyed household, infectious hepatitis, diarrhea and ascariasis were the most 
common (Table 6). Diseases and productivity losses linked to water and sanitation in developing 
countries amount to 2% of GDP, rising to 5% in Sub-Saharan Africa—more than the region gets 
in aid (UNDP, 2006). 
 
Table 6 The proportion of households registered waterborne disease cases.  
 
Khoroo #13 
Sukhbaatar district Disease 
N % 
Dysenteria 6 5.0 
Hepatitis 26 21.7 
Diarrhea 11 9.2 
Ascariasis 13 10.8 
Scabies 1 0.8 
Dermatitis 5 4.2 
Total 62 51.7 
 
Distance to water source, type of water source, non-boiled drinking water and inadequate 
sanitation facilities are significantly associated with waterborne disease. The study found that 
adequate water supply in the areas is considered as the most serious problems that need urgent 
steps. Therefore, necessary investment to improve water supply in the ger area can directly or 
indirectly have significant economic and health benefits. A WHO Cost-Benefit Analysis showed 
that every US$1 invested in improved drinking water and sanitation services can yield economic 
benefits of US$4 to US$34 depending on the region (WHO/UNICEF, 2005). The economic 
benefits of household water treatment – such as the application of chlorination, solar disinfection, 
filters or combined flocculation and chlorination powders - can yield benefits of US$ 5 to 140 per 
US$1 invested (WHO/UNICEF, 2005). 
 
5.  Conclusion 
Drinking water should be stored at ambient temperature no longer than 3-7 days in covered 
container because stagnant water condition stimulates the growth of bacteria in sediments of the 
bottom of the container. Therefore, the container should be emptied and washed by clean water 
and dried up at least once a week.  To reduce the burden of water supply and water borne illness 
in the study area the following actions are recommended. 
 
 Make necessary provision for accessible and good quality water sources by constructing new 
water distribution kiosks in the study area. 
 Introduction and promotion of health education program on water safety and personal 
hygiene in the targeted area to change the behavioural pattern and raise health and sanitation 
awareness. Especially focus should be given on an education about safe storage and handling 
of water in the home to minimize water contamination in the households. People should be 
258 
 
trained on health effect of contaminated water and unsafe water sources like spring and 
adequate manner of water handling. Effective and affordable technology to improve the 
quality of household stored water like introducing hygienic design water vessels should be 
taken into consideration.  
 Introduction of point of use water quality monitoring should be taken in place for 
surveillance of water supply and diarrhea diseases by health agencies and other relevant 
organizations. There is growing evidence that simple, “low-tech”, low cost interventions at 
the household and community level can significantly improve the safety of household water, 
thus reduce diarrhea and save millions of lives. Among these interventions, point-of-use 
chemical or solar disinfection and safe water storage are most promising. Disinfection by 
sodium hypochlorite, the active ingredient in commercial laundry bleach solutions, has 
proved to be the safest, most effective, and least expensive chemical disinfectant for point-of-
use treatment. Field data have shown that point-of-use treatment by sodium hypochlorite can 
reduce diarrheal illness by as much as 85% (Dunston et. al., 2001). 
 Application of GIS (Geographical Information System) for monitoring water quality and 
mapping of area exposed to health hazard risk can save valuable resources and time and 
assist the decision makers to suggest appropriate water treatment facilities or alternative 
options (Shams et. al., 2006). 
 
References 
 
Arifeen, S.E., Black, R.E., Caulfield, L.E., Antelman, G. and Baqui, A.H. (2001). Determinants of 
infant growth in the slums of Dhaka: size and maturity at birth, breastfeeding and morbidity, Eur 
J Clin Nutr. Mar: 55(3):167-178. 
Dunston, C., McAfee, D., Kaiser, R., Rakotoarison, D., Rambeloson, L., Hoang, A.T. and Quick, R. 
E. (2001). Collaboration, cholera, and cyclones: a project to improve point-of-use water quality in 
Madagascar. Am. J. Public Health, 91: 574–1576. 
Elimelech, M. (2006). The global challenge for adequate and safe water. AQUA, 55(1):3-9. 
Firkin, F., Chesterman, C., Penington, D. and Rush, B. (2002). De Gruchy’s Clinical Haematology 
in Medical Practice, 5th Edition. Thomas Press Limited, India.  
Gray, N. F.(2008). Water Technology an introduction for environmental scientists and engineers, 2nd 
Edition, Elsevier. 
Gulyani, S. and Talukdar, D. (2008). Slum Real Estate: The Low-Quality, High-Price Puzzle in 
Nairobi’s Slum Rental Market and its Implications for Theory and Practice, World Development, 
36(10): 1916–1937. 
Honda, T. and Shams, S. (2004). Problems and issues in achieving sustainability: a case study of the 
ger area in Ulaanbaator, Mogolia. Proc. of the Int.Conf. Future Vision and Challenges for Urban 
Development, 20-22 December 2004, Cairo, Egypt. 
Howard, G. and Bartram, J. (2005). Effective water supply surveillance in urban areas of developing 
countries, Journal of Water and Health, 3(1): 31-43. 
Jalil, A. and Njiru, C. (2010). Water demand management at household level: problems and 
prospects. Proceedings of the International Symposium on Environmental Degradation and 
Sustainable Development ISEDSD 2010, 31 37, BUET, Dhaka, Bangladesh. 
Karn, S. K. and Harada, H. (2002). Field survey on water supply, sanitation and associated health 
impacts in urban poor communities – a case from Mumbai City, India. Wat. Sci. Technol. 46(11–
12) : 269–275. 
259 
 
Kiker, G.A., Bridges, T. S., Varghese, A., Seager, T.P. & Linkovjj, I. (2005). Application of 
Multicriteria Decision Analysis in Environmental Decision Making. Integrated Environmental 
Assessment and Management, 1(2): 95–108. 
Kumar, R., Kumar, S. and Anurag (2007). Regional Dimension of Disparities in Slum Literacy in 
India, Research and Practice in Social Sciences, 2(2):103-123. 
McMichael, A. J. 2000 The urban environment and health in a world of increasing globalization: 
issues for developing countries. Bull. Wld. Health Orgn.  78(9):1117–1126. 
Rosegrant M.W., Ringler, C. and Gerpacio, R.V. (1997). Water and Land Resources and Global 
Food Supply, paper prepared for the 23rd International Conference of Agricultural Economics, 
Sacramento, California, August 10-16, 1997. 
Shams, S., Bhattacharya, P., Langaas, S., Jacks, G., Ahmed, K.M., Anders, G., Chen, D. and 
Granlund, A. (2006). Mapping and Interpretation of field data for Evaluation and Mitigation of 
Groundwater Contamination: The Case of Arsenic in Bangladesh, J. of Hydroinformatics, 7: 25-
36. 
UNCHS. (2001). Cities in a Globalizing World: Global Report on Human Settlements 2001, 
Earthscan, London. 
UNDP. (2006). Beyond Scarcity: Power, Poverty and Global Water Crisis, HumanDevelopment 
Report 2006. New York, United Nations Development Programme. 
WHO / UNICEF. (2004). Joint Monitoring Programme for Water Supply and Sanitation. 
http://www.wssinfo.org/en/25_wat_dev.html (Accessed on 19-04-10). 
WHO. (2002). Water, Sanitation and Hygiene Links to Health. www.who.int/inffs/en/fact210.html. 
(Accessed on 11-02-10). 
WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Programme. (2005). Water for Life: Making it Happen, 
http://www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/waterforlife.pdf (Accessed on 25-06-10). 
260 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
WATERSHED MANAGEMENT CONSIDERING THE IMPACT OF CLIMATE 
CHANGE : A REVIEW OF  NATIONAL WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN (NWMP) 
PROGRAM OF BANGLADESH 
 
 
Saiful Alam1, Syed Abu Shoaib2, Nahid Sultana 3, 2 , Md. Hasan Shahriar2 and Md Jahid Hossain2  
 
 
ABSTRACT: This paper identifies the process of generating and implementing plans, programs 
and project to maintain and enhance watershed functions considering the impact of climate 
change. As Bangladesh is one of the most vulnerable countries to climate change in the world, its 
water sector is under real threat. Most important factors that will change due to climate change in 
Bangladesh are:  i) Heavier rainfall in monsoon season ii) Lower rainfall in winter season iii) 
Temperature rise iv) Melting of glaciers v) Sea level rise. vi) Increased Cyclone frequency. The 
National Water Management Plan (NWMP) has 8 clusters and 84 programs. The impact of 
Climate change on NWMP will be different for different programs. Some Programs have higher 
impact, some have medium and some have lower impact. The cluster main river has greater 
impact of climate change. The sea level rise and melting of Himalayan ice due to climate change 
will increase salinity intrusion, erosion and sedimentation process. Construction of Ganges 
Barrage, Brahmaputra Barrage and Meghna Barrage if designed considering the expected 
changes due to climate change will increase fresh water flow in dry season. The program like the 
water supply and distribution systems, sanitation and sewerage system under the cluster Towns 
and Rural areas and cluster major cities will have impact due to sea level rise, heavy rainfall and 
temperature rise due to climate change. The temperature rise will change the demand of water in 
different hydrological areas which will change the water supply and distribution systems. The 
height of the polder in coastal region and flood protection embankment require further 
consideration according to sea level rise. The increase of cyclone intensity, temperature, sea level 
due to climate change will have greater impact on the cluster Disaster Management. The increase 
of temperature scarcity of rainfall due to climate change will have negative impact on the cluster 
Environment and Aquatic Resources. The river pollution, biodiversity of the Haor basin and flood 
plain, salinity in the Sundarban will highly impacted by the climate change. The cluster 
institutional Development has no direct impact of climate change but the programs under this 
cluster require some changes and addition. The institutions that deal with water sector project 
require capacity building with respect to climate change issue. Modern tools, techniques and 
knowledge related to climate change are essential for better future planning. The programs under 
                                                        
1 Principal Scientific Officer, Water Resources Planning Organization, Ministry of Water Resources, 
Banani, Dhaka, pso_wr@warpo.gov.bd 
2 Scientific Officer, Water Resources Planning Organization, Ministry of Water Resources, Banani, Dhaka, 
shoaibmila@yahoo.com, shariar_warpo@yahoo.com, jahid972004@yahoo.com 
3 Researcher, Institute of Environmental Studies, University of  New South Wales, Sydney, Australia, 
n.sultana@unsw.edu.au 
261 
 
cluster Enabling Environment require to include some new legislations, rules and regulations 
which will help to minimize the negative impact of climate change on other programs.  
 
1. Introduction 
 
1.1. Watershed Management  
Watershed management begins with understanding the basic concepts of watershed functions and 
values and learning how to protect or maintain a desired condition of that water resource. Each 
watershed is unique and includes particular elements that require individual attention, whether it 
is agriculture, industry, mining or feedlots, all must be managed in some way to protect the water 
and the land within the watershed. The main purpose of watershed management is to protect, 
maintain, and restore water resources in our watersheds. In order to do this, we must use proper 
planning and management of water resources and their uses; reduce the impacts of nonpoint 
sources of pollution on water resources; regulate activities for soil conservation and waterway 
and wetlands protection; form partnerships and build local capacity to restore and protect water 
resources. And, the most important part is educating citizens about watersheds and watershed 
management. Watershed management is the judicious management of three basic resources of 
soil, water and vegetation, on watershed basis, for achieving particular objective for the well 
being of the people. It includes treatment of land most suitable biological as well as engineering 
measures. The process includes: Production of food, fodder, fuel. Pollution control, Over 
exploitation of resources should be minimized ,Water storage, flood control, checking, 
sedimentation, Wild life preservation, Erosion control and prevention of soil, degradation and 
conservation of soil and water, Employment generation through industrial development, dairy 
fishery production, Recharging of ground water to provide regular water supply for consumption 
and industry as well as irrigation, Recreational facility. In this paper a review of National Water 
Management Plan Programme (NWMP) of Bangladesh will be discussed considering the climate 
change impact. Figure 1 shows the qualitative path of the review. 
                
1.2 National Water Management Plan(NWMP) 
 
Resource ownership, allocation and rights determine how society decides to prioritize the use of 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
               Figure 1: Climate Change Impact flow in Watershed 
262 
 
water and its distribution according to broad objectives and goals. NWPo confirms the state as 
the owner of all water resources. It also sets the priority of water use between sectors, and whilst 
reserving the right of Government to allocate environment. It should be specified in relative detail 
over the medium term, and in outline terms over the longer term. Where there are major 
unknowns and/or risks, these should be described together with measures for resolving such 
uncertainties over specified time periods. The National Water Policy describes the NWMP as a 
plan that addresses “the overall resource management issues in each region and the whole of 
Bangladesh, and providing directions for the short, intermediate, and long runs. The plan is now 
executed by different agencies as determined by the Government from time to time. The NWMP 
and all other related plans are prepared in comprehensive and integrated manner, with regard for 
the interests of all water-related sectors. The planning methodology ensured co-operation across 
sectors and people's participation in the process (NWMP,2004). The NWMP thus addressed the 
whole water sector in a manner that fosters co-operation, and provide details of how, when and 
by whom the directives of the NWPo are to be implemented. The NWMP is a management plan. 
It’s a part of a wider framework by which the sector is to be managed. This framework also 
includes: Government policy, Laws, regulations and rules, Standards, guidelines and procedures, 
The National Water Resources Database and other GoB databases, a management information 
system, a monitoring and evaluation system. The Executive Committee of the National Water 
Resources Council (ECNWRC) is the top brass to resolve any interagency conflict in this regard. 
 
1.3 Climate change at global scale 
 
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) predicts that global temperature will 
rise between 1.8 ⁰C and 4.0 ⁰C by the last decade of the 21st century. As a consequence, the 
following changes are expected:  
 Frequency of extreme hydrological events will increase 
 Intensity of extreme hydrological events will increase 
 Occurrence of erratic and unusual behavior of weather will be frequent  
 Sea Level will rise; to what level is being debated  
 Hot and humid conditions will increase the incidence of water borne and vector borne 
diseases like malaria, dengue fever and diarrhoeal diseases 
The accelerating changes in our global climate will undoubtedly cause major changes in the 
patterns of water cycle. The magnitude and frequency of extreme hydrological events including 
precipitation, floods, cyclones, storm surges, and droughts and these phenomena would increase 
and adversely affect the water sector in the country. Changes in the hydrological cycle are 
directly linked with the occurrences of hydro-meteorological disasters and as a consequence 
theses disasters are looming in a more intense and frequent pattern. Regional level climate change 
forecast with more reliability is still a gap; several institutions are working to meet the gap. In the 
mean time the strategy is to take up adaptation activities that will have ‘no regret’ as we have 
more detail data and information about impending changes.  
 
2. Climate Changes for Bangladesh 
 
Based on the scanty data analysis of the recent past data the following changes has been predicted 
for Bangladesh that indicates where future emphasis is required in the water resources 
management: 
263 
 
 Excessive rainfall at present, untimely and irregular distribution; 
 Increase in tidal bore, no of cyclonic events, variation in tidal flow in the coastal regions; 
 Increase infrequency of flash flood;  
 Increase in surface temperature (ground and sea); 
 Increase in droughts and dry spells, storms and hailstorms  
 Intensity of mist fog increased in the winter. 
 Monsoon rainfall has shifted; 
 Severity of cold and its duration is decreasing  
Bangladesh prepared National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA) in 2005 where several 
sectors were identified that might be potentially affected due to climate change. National 
Adaptation Plan of Action (NAPA) has provided a broad list of climatic parameters that might 
critically impact different sectors over different geographical locations of Bangladesh.  
 
Table 1: Climate change impact and critical vulnerable area (NAPA, 2005) 
 
Climate and Related 
Elements  
Critical Vulnerable Areas  Resultant impact 
• Agriculture (crop, livestock, fisheries) 
• Water scarcity 
• Energy 
Temperature rise and 
drought  
 North-west 
• Health 
• Agriculture (crop, fisheries, livestock) 
• Water (water logging, drinking water, urban) 
• Human settlement 
• Energy 
Sea Level Rise and 
Salinity Intrusion  
 Coastal Area, Island 
• Health 
• Agriculture (crop, fisheries, livestock) 
• Water (urban, industry) 
• Infrastructure 
• Human settlement 
• Health 
• Disaster 
Floods   Central Region, North 
East Region, Char land 
• Energy 
• Marine Fishing 
• Infrastructure 
• Human settlement 
Cyclone and Storm 
Surge1  
 Coastal and Marine Zone 
• Life and property 
• Water (Navigation) Drainage congestion   Coastal Area, Urban, 
South West • Agriculture (crop) 
 
 
264 
 
 
The critical region is the coastal region that presumably would be mostly affected due to climate 
change. Frequency of tidal surge and cyclone disrupt the development, livelihood of this region 
due to these disasters. Recent study also shows that the Bangladesh as a part of Bengal basin is 
subsiding; coastal zone is experiencing the subsidence most (in Khulna area subsidence is @ 9.55 
mm/year). The problem of drainage congestions and water logging in the region is going to 
multiply under the climate change scenarios. Salinity intrusion is expected to increase with sea 
level rise therefore requires augmentation of fresh water inflows in the region during critical 
periods. Pre-monsoon flooding will affect North eastern and north western zone mostly. The 
decrease in rainfall during dry season is likely to affect the North western, southwestern and 
north central zone mostly which is already low rainfall zone.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2: Likely impact of climate change in Bangladesh and required investments under 
different sector (BCCSAP, 2009) 
 
Population in the urban areas is expected to increase by about 40% by the year 2025; the problem 
water supply, sanitation, drainage and flood control is expected to increase many fold with the 
climate change.Existing flood forecasting and early warning systems need to be strengthen by 
increasing lead times and strengthening dissemination mechanisms.  
 
Multipurpose cyclone and flood shelter need to be established more as well as there should be 
ensure proper management of this infrastructure. Flood Zoning, Flood Insurance, adjustment of 
265 
 
Cropping Calendar, Watershed management need to be established. Drought most commonly 
affects the north western region, which causes lower rainfall than the rest of the country. Initiative 
is required for harnessing surface water by conserving river water developing deep tube well and 
setting up the Barrages and also to adjust this situation in the existing cropping pattern. Recently 
published Bangladesh Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan (BCCSAP, 2009) also identified 
key climatic parameters that might affect different sectors including the investment need for 
adaptation and mitigation. 
 
The Strategy underlines actions to be taken under the following groups as follows:  
 
 Flood management 
 Irrigation and Drought management 
 Water supply and sanitation 
 Major River and Water management 
 Urban drainage 
 Protection of coastal areas from Storm surges and cyclone 
 Erosion control measure 
 Institutional development and enabling environment 
 Research, information dissemination and management 
 Environmental and pollution control 
 
3.  NWMP implementation Scenario and Climate Change 
 
The National Water Management Plan prepared by the Water Resources Planning Organization 
(WARPO, 2004) has a total of 84 programmes under eight clusters within the principle of 
integrated water resources planning to be implemented by different agencies relevant to water 
resources management. The sub-sectoral programmers in the NWMP grouped as per BCCAS 
actions may be summarized below. Enter discussion on the allocation under Water supply and 
sanitation (Urban drainage, flood control separated), erosion control, Coastal zone protection, 
Research & information allocation to be discussed. Clearing House of WARPO, which is 
established as per national water policy (1999) to check the technical aspects of the water sector 
projects, brings a new paradigm in the water sector of Bangladesh. Ten points are considered in 
the clearing house of WARPO: (i)Whether the project is in conformity National Water Policy (ii) 
Whether the project is in conformity with National Water Management Plan (NWMP) framework 
and its Eight Clusters (iii) Examine whether the project is in conformity with the goal and 
objectives of the pro-poor related actions programs/projects of water resources management 
included in the Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP)(iv) Whether the project has followed 
the Guidelines of Participatory Water Management (GPWM) and ensure that Cost recovery, Cost 
sharing and O&M incorporated within its plan of action(v) Whether the project is consistent with 
the concept of Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM)(vi) Examine whether the 
project is not overlapping and duplication with any other project of other organizations or 
individual/ group initiatives and resolve disputes if any relating to appropriation(vii) Examine 
Environment Impact Assessment EIA of water sector projects(viii) Examine if important 
sociological issues with especial attention to poor and women are adequately addressed (SIA) (ix) 
Examine whether the project appraisal (feasibility studies) followed the Guidelines for Project 
Assessment (GPA) (x) Ensure appropriate and proven analytical procedures and evaluation 
266 
 
methods, tools and technique are used in the project appraisal. Infact, the above mentioned ten 
points closely focus on the climate change impact on the water sector projects. With the changing 
climate, National Water Management Plan (NWMP) needs systematic updating to ensure a 
transparent plan for the future 
 
3.1 Implication of NWMP Climate Programmes 
 
In this section How climate programme is already incorporated within existing National Water 
Management Plan (NWMP) is discussed. Major issues are addressed in 11 main clusters focusing 
climate change impact. Table 2 shows the short term (ST)(0-5 years), Medium Term (MT)(5-
10years) and Long Term (LT)(10-25 years)  investment scenario of NWMP climate Programme  
Table 2 : Implication of  NWMP  Climate Programmes 
 
Clusters of NWMP climate programmes  ST(mill. 
Tk) 
MT 
(mill. 
Tk) 
LT 
(mill. 
Tk) 
(i) Flood management FM 7921 12284.3 73273.6 
(ii)Irrigation and Drought management IRR 1640.4 5571.3 11795.3 
(iii)Rural Water supply and sanitation R-
WSS 
20000 64450 93855 
(iv)Urban Water supply and sanitation U-
WSS 
13737.5 54200 163351 
(v)Major River and Water management MR 5648 2740 115153.1 
(vi)Urban drainage UD 10916.5 48439.6 55577.4 
(vii)Protection of coastal areas from 
Storm surges and cyclone 
CP 2576.8 5801.9 23527.7 
(viii)Erosion control measure EC 2077 5813.7 24415.2 
(ix)Institutional development and 
enabling environment 
ID 4073.7 6992.9 8211.9 
(x)Research, information management RD 715 1000 1700 
(xi)Environmental and pollution control EP 2926.1 4756.3 7940.5 
 
3.2 Linkage between NWMP and Bangladesh Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan 
(BCCSAP) 
BCCSAP provides a set of programmes under six priority action pillars: (i) Food Security, Social 
Protection and Health (ii)Comprehensive Disaster Management (iii) Infrastructure (iv)Research 
and Knowledge Management. It is a 10- year programme (2009-2018) for capacity building and 
country resilient to climate change challenges. First five-year part based on six themes 
encompasses 44 programmes related to adaptation and mitigation. On the other hand, the 
National Water Management Plan is set in the context of development indicators for 50 years. It 
is a rolling 25-year plan in three phases. The short-term (2000-05) is considered a firm plan, the 
medium-term (2006-10) an indicative plan, and the long-term (2011-25) a perspective plan. It’s 
267 
 
said in the plan that Implementation of the plan is monitored regularly and it will be updated 
every five years. NWMP identified some knowledge gaps for the future water sector development 
of Bangladesh.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
 
 
Figure 3: Strategic Investment for NWMP climate Programmes 
 
There are many different technical issues to address in improving water resources management in 
Bangladesh. Significant challenges exist in dealing with such issues as river maintenance, erosion 
control, land accretion and coastal zone management. Most important issues that figure out by 
NWMP are as follows:Understanding the full implications of climate change and developing 
appropriate responses, Fully understanding the sustainable limits of groundwater use and the 
impacts that quality has on its utility, and the long term strategic implications, Understanding the 
relationship between water and the natural environment and establishing key indicators and 
thresholds for environmental health and sustainability and thresholds for environmental health 
and sustainability, Assessing the current and future extent of contamination and the implications 
for food safety of irrigating with arsenic contaminated water and the effectiveness of treatment 
method for domestic water supplies, Determining the most appropriate management models for 
Bangladesh to follow, Assessing how best to promote private sector participation in major 
infrastructure development and management, Promoting dialogue amongst the co-riparian 
countries and developing appropriate long-term strategies for Bangladesh in response to the 
increasing demands on the overall system. 
 
In this section linkage between NWMP and BCCSAP is developed to enhance the development 
activities considering the impact of climate change.
268 
 
Adaptation to Climate Change Within National Water Management Plan (NWMP) Sub-sectors 
according to 
BCCSAP 
NWMP 
programme 
Activities in the water sector adaptive to Climate change (with no regret) 
DM 004, 005 Raising national and Regional and feeder roads and railways above low risk levels 
DM 003 Flood Proofing in the Charlands and Haor Basin 
MC 010, 012, 
014, 016 
Dhaka, Chittagong, Khulna and Rajshahi city  Flood Protection 
Flood 
management 
(FM) 
TR 007 Large and Small Town Flood Protection 
AW 001-006 Expansion of irrigation both groundwater  and surface water  in public and private sector, improve efficiency of 
water use, cost recovery with increase participation of communities and local government 
Irrigation and 
Drought 
management 
(IRR) 
DM 006 Promote supplementary irrigation during the drought-prone aman season, as well as including efforts to drought-
proof rural water supplies. 
TR 003, 005 Implementation of piped water supply in town areas and provide hygienic latrines for sanitation and introduce 
sewerage system 
Rural water 
supply and 
sanitation (R-
WSS) 
TR 004, 006 Provide quality water supply services and hygienic sanitation facilities to rural areas 
MC 002-009 Improve and extend water services with institutional and financial reforms, expand sanitation and sewerage coverage 
in the Dhaka, Chittagong, Khulna, Rajshahi city. 
Urban water 
supply and 
sanitation (U-
WSS) 
MC 001 Asset management of water supply and sewerage system in the Major cities 
Major River and 
Water 
management 
(MR) 
MR 002-005, 010 Augmenting surface water availability from major Rivers through barrages and other means for multipurpose uses in 
SW, NW, NC and NE regions 
TR 008 Install adequate drainage system for storm water drainage Urban drainage 
(UD) MC 011, 013, 
015,017 
Develop and extend the storm water drainage network in Dhaka, Chittagong, Rajshahi and Khulna city 
DM 001, 002 Construction and maintenance of Cyclone shelters and Killas and bari-level cyclone shelter in he char areas 
AW 007 Strengthening of coastal polders  and inland polders 
Protection of 
coastal areas from 
Storm surges and 
cyclone (CP) 
AW 008 Land Reclamation and Coastal Protection and A forestation 
Erosion control 
measure (EC) 
MR 006-009, 011 Undertaking implementation of dredging, river bank protection for resuscitation of rivers and khals of the regions for 
drainage and surface water supply and navigation 
269 
 
Adaptation to Climate Change Within National Water Management Plan (NWMP) Sub-sectors 
according to 
BCCSAP 
NWMP 
programme 
Activities in the water sector adaptive to Climate change (with no regret) 
ID 001-005 Transfer of FCD/FCDI to local management, Local Government need assessment and capacity development and 
regulatory body for water supply and sanitation, 
ID 006-010 Strengthening of WARPO as permanent planning organization, Strengthening of DoE and expand up to district level, 
capacity development of DMB, capacity building for BMD for early warning, Haor board for preserving wetlands, 
RRI for river management  and BWDB for flood forecasting and warning and monitoring water resources 
EE 001-006 Drafting of water laws to facilitate management water resources, testing participatory management models, prepare 
guidelines manual for project planning, and economic instrument for regulation 
Institutional 
development and 
enabling 
environment (ID) 
EE 010 Raising public awareness, private participation, alternative Financing for water management 
EE 007-009 Systematic and comprehensive water sector database establishment, and undertake research for water resources and 
agriculture. 
Research, 
information 
management 
(R&D) 
MR 001 Undertaking of Studies and research for augmenting surface water availability. 
EA 001-003, 006 National Pollution Control Plan and undertake clean-up of existing pollution and other specific measures 
EA 004, 005 Capture fisheries increase and fish friendly structures construction 
EA 009 Improve management in the Ganges dependent area for ecological protection in the Sunderban areas 
Environmental 
and pollution 
control (PC) 
EA 010 Environmental Responsibility Public Awareness Raising and Empowerment 
270 
 
4. Case Study: Bhola 
 
Coastal zone is diverse in a number of aspects from rest of the country. Three indicators have 
been considered for determining the landward boundaries of the coastal zone of Bangladesh. 
These are: influence of tidal waters, salinity intrusion and cyclones/storm surges. Out of 19 
coastal districts, Bhola a district in south-western Bangladesh is high-flying as a coastal zone 
area. It is located in the Barisal Division. It is also the largest offshore island region in 
Bangladesh, with an area of 3403.48 km². It is bounded by Lakshmipur and Barisal districts to 
the north, Bay of Bengal to the south, Lakshmipur and Noakhali districts, Meghna (lower) river 
and Shahbazpur Channel to the east, Patuakhali district and Tentulia river to the west. Seven 
Upzila of this districts are Bhola Sadar Upazila, Burhanuddin Upazila,Char Fasson Upazila, 
Daulatkhan Upazila, Lalmohan Upazila,Manpura Upazila, Tazumuddin Upazila 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4(a) : Map Showing Bhola district 
 
4.1 Invested Programme in Water Sector (Bhola) 
Presently 7 projects of BWDB and Small scale water sector projects of LGED is visible in the 
water sector of Bhola districts. Name of the projects are:(1) Construction of Embankment at Char 
Kukri-Mukri & River bank protection at Ghosherhat & Ramneoaz (2) River Bank Protection of 
Vulnerable part at Lalmohan upzila under Bhola District (phase iii) (3) Protection of Elisha-
Kachia area of  Bhola District from the erosion of Meghna River (4) Bhola District Town 
Protection (Phase –iii) (5) Charfession and Monpura Town Protection Project in Bhola District 
271 
 
(6) Protection of Shahbazpur Gas Field from Erosion of the Meghna River under Borhanuddin 
Upzila of Bhola District (Phase –ii) (7) Bhola District Town Protection (Phase –ii).Major 
Problem Identified in Bhola are Erosion, Tidal Surge, Salinity intrusion, Flood, Cyclone, Fresh 
water unavailability. From the project description, we see erosion is the main threat in Bhola, 
although Tidal Surge, Salinity intrusion is dominating impact due to climate change.  
Figure 4 (b): Hydraulogical Scenario of Bhola District 
 
5. Conclusion and Discussion 
The main purpose of watershed management is to protect, maintain, and restore water resources 
in our watersheds. In order to do this, we must use proper planning and management of water 
resources and their uses. Upstream affects downstream. All activities that have an impact on 
water quality, quantity, or rate of flow at locations upstream, have impacts downstream. Because 
of this, watersheds are logically the most appropriate units for managing water.The watershed-
based management provides a way to consider a wide range of issues along with the community’s 
vision for the future of the watershed under a single framework. National Water Act considering 
the main principal of National Water Policy (1999) and Climate Change Impact could ease the 
process to ensure IWRM.  
 
The programs/ projects included in the water resources of the Sixth Five Year Plan SFYP (2011-
2015) would require approximate Tk.235050 million for implementation. Institutional, human res
ources, logistic and financial involvement for the successful implementation of the various progra
ms are huge and need well through out strategic and policies. Strategies SFYP plan ( 2011-
2015) could be little step to cop up with climate change. Dredging of Rivers ,River bank protec
tion (New),River bank protection (Rehabilitation),Construction of Embankment, Resectioning 
272 
 
of embankment, Coastal embankment, Resectioning of Coastal embankment, Coastal Cross d
am, Excavation of Irrigation canal, Re-Excavation of Irrigation canal, Excavation /Re-Excava
tion of drainage channel, Irrigation / Hydraulic structure, Rehabilitation of irrigation structure
, Construction / Rehabilitation of flood control structures, Reservoir, Rubber dam, Barrage, I
nstallation of pump house & rehabilitation, Formation of WMO's ( in addition to existing 70
00 nos) are the basic output need for the immediate way forward to mingle with the nature. 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
We appreciate the cooperation of MD Shahjahan, Director General and Dr. Nilufa Islam Director 
(Technical) of WARPO  
 
References 
Banglapedia. (2006). The National Encyclopaedia of Bangladesh. Asiatic Society of Bangladesh. 
Bangladesh Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan (BCCSAP). (2009). Ministry of 
Environment and Forest. Bangladesh.  
IPCC. (2001a). Climate Change 2001: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. In: Contribution of 
Working Group II to the Third Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change. McCarthy, J. J. Canziani, O. F. Leary, N. A. Dokken, D. J. and White, K. 
S. (eds.). Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 1032 pp. 
National Water Management Plan (NWMP). (2004): Water Resources Planning Organization, 
Ministry of Water Resources, Bangladesh.  
National Water Policy (NWPo). (1999): Water Resources Planning Organization, Ministry of 
Water Resources, Bangladesh. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
273 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
A CASE STUDY TO EVALUATE COMMUNITY BASED ORGANIZATION’S ACTIVITY 
FOR APPROPRIATE MANAGEMENT OF ECOSAN TOILET IN RURAL AREAS OF 
BANGLADESH 
 
 
Md. Mosleh Uddin Parvez1, Qazi Azaduzzaman1, Abdullah Al Mamun2 and 
Dr Kunio Takahashi3  
 
 
ABSTRACT: Japan Association of Drainage and Environment (JADE) has been introduced the 
EcoSan toilet, a specialized type of Urine Diverting Dry Toilet (UDDT)   installed in the rural 
areas of Bangladesh in 2004. Until now, JADE with its partner organizations (BARD and other 
NGOs) has constructed around 500 EcoSan toilets for family use in various rural areas in 
Bangladesh; those areas belongs to Comilla, Munshiganj, Jessore, Satkhira, Naogon, Manikgnj 
and Gazipur districts. Appropriate use of this toilet can ensure various benefits: less disease 
incidence reduced medical expenses, more agriculture production, etc. The authors have 
implemented adaptive system management model for appropriate management of those toilets in 
9 small rural areas of mentioned districts in Bangladesh. Main component of the model is 
Community Based Organization’s (CBO) approaches for sanitary management of human excreta 
through EcoSan and other types of toilets. Compared to the initial situation, it has been found that 
the toilets are being used in more sanitary ways and the users are getting more benefits after one 
year of implementation of CBO activities. Community based management systems are 
implemented through active cooperation and involvement of local communities. A total of 21 
CBOs has been formed in targeted areas. Data were collected through baseline survey in July 
2010, Continuous monitoring are being implemented to draw the route of changes in toilet 
situation.  CBO activities related data has collected from their meeting minute’s book to classify 
the members demand and evaluating the CBOs activities. CBOs have started activity after April 
2011 and in full phase. Some CBOs has started their activity at the end of 2010 and still 
continuing. CBOs have taken different initiatives to improve the sanitation situation as well as 
their organization strength and capacity like toilet repairing and campaign on toilet use and 
maintenance. From the survey result it was found that 85% of the total toilets are being used in 
2011 where 82% in 2010. Among the areas Sharsha in Jessore almost 100 %, Comilla 95%of the 
total toilets were functional and well managed in 2011 where 90% and 92% in 2010. Significant 
improvement is being observed at Sreepur in Gazipur, Gheor in Manikganj and Sharsha in 
Jessore areas toilets compared to the previous situation. Small repairing by CBO has brought 
these changes in Gheor and Sreepur area toilets. On the other hand it was found from CBOs 
                                                        
1Japan Association of Drainage and Environment Bangladesh Office (JADE-B), Dhaka, Bangladesh. 
2Joint Director, Bangladesh Academy for Rural Development (BARD), Kotbari, Comilla, Bangladesh. 
3Japan Association of Drainage and Environment, Head Office (JADE-J), Japan. 
274 
 
Kolaroa (25*) 
Shymnagoar (25*) 
activity evaluation score that Comilla and Jessor areas CBOs was  got highest score then others 
area. Same management system was applied in each area but different result was found in 
different areas. The variation of initial situation of the areas, activity starting time and liveliness 
of CBO can be responsible for differences in integral situation of toilets among the areas.  In this 
paper, analysis is being done to evaluate the efficacy of CBO approach for appropriate 
management of EcoSan toilets in rural areas of Bangladesh 
 
1. Introduction 
 
The high incidence of waterborne diseases and infant mortality is related to lack of safe water 
supply and improve sanitation and unhygienic behavior. Every year 50,800 children under five 
years of age die of diarrhoea in Bangladesh (http://www.unicef.org/bangladesh/media_5737.htm). 
The well managed sustainable water supply and sanitation activities can be reduced the water 
borne diseases and improved the health. A sanitation 
system that provides Ecological Sanitation (EcoSan) 
is a cycle—a sustainable, closed-loop system, which 
closes the gap between sanitation and agriculture. 
The EcoSan approach is resource minded and 
represents a holistic concept towards ecologically 
and economically sound sanitation. An appropriate 
human excreta management and utilizing human 
excreta relates to poverty alleviation through 
reducing health risk and increasing agricultural 
productivity (Takahashi, K et al. 2011). The authors 
have selected ecological sanitation and have installed 
about 400 toilets (referred to “EcoSan toilet” 
hereinafter) for household use. The EcoSan toilet, the 
type installed is urine diverting dry toilet (UDDT) is 
capable to reduce burden on family finance, 
especially for the poor families, and break the vicious 
circle between poverty and unhygienic environment 
(Takahashi, K et al. 2011). For improving sanitation 
facilities JADE has introduced EcoSan toilets in 
Bangladesh in 2004. Until now, JADE with its 
relating organizations and other local NGOs has constructed around 400 EcoSan toilets for family 
use in various rural areas in Bangladesh; those areas belongs to Comilla, Munshiganj, Jessore, 
Satkhira, Naogon, Manikgnj and Gazipur districts. The village where EcoSan toilet has been 
installed belongs to Comilla, Munshiganj, Jessore, Satkhira, Naogon, Manikgnj and Gazipur 
districts (figure-1). The authors are now implementing a follow up project named “Awareness 
Raising and Capacity Building on Appropriate Management of EcoSan toilets in Rural Areas in 
Bangladesh” funded by JICA. The authors have followed adaptive management system model 
(figure-2) to implement the project. The model is based on community based organization’s 
(CBO) activity and continuous monitoring (Azaduzzaman, Q, et al. 2011). In this paper the 
authors have shown the effect of CBO activity on sanitary management of EcoSan toilet based on 
the result of baseline (diagnosis) survey, middle term survey and monitoring.  
Figure-1: Survey areas (refer to world-
atlas.com.) (##*) is number of Eco-san toilet 
Niamotpur  (40*) 
Sreepur (60*) 
Geor (60*) 
Comilla (114*) 
Keshabpur (40*) 
Sharsha (20*) 
275 
 
 S 
T = 0 
Diagnosis Survey 
Initial situation identification Y (0) 
t = 12 
Y (T) = YG T = T+1 
Y (T) = B (T) Adjustment 
E 
Monitoring X (t) CBO activity ϴ (t) 
t = 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure-2: Adaptive management system model 
 
Base equation of adaptive management system model is, 
 
Y (T)=F(X, θ, T) …………… (1). 
 
Here, Y: integral toilet situation, X: toilet monitoring score, θ: CBO Activity, T, t: Year, Month, 
B: benefit etc, and YG: Goal 
 
2. Methodology 
 
The authors have implemented baseline survey (Diagnosis) in July 2010 as well as middle term 
survey in August 2011using same questionnaire to know the prevailing and present situation. 
276 
 
Continuous monitoring are being implemented to draw the route of changes in toilet situation. 
CBO activities related data has collected from their meeting minute’s book to classify the 
members demand and evaluating the CBOs activities. 
 
3. Result and Discussion 
 
3.1  Initial situation of installed EcoSan toilet 
 
From the base line survey in July 2010, find out the functional situation of installed EcoSan toilet 
in rural areas of Bangladesh. Table-2 shows the area-wise number of installed functional and used 
EcoSan toilet in 2010. Functionally toilet is ok means all parts of toilet is functionally ok. The 
survey items related to function of toilets determined by the authors and these are presented in the 
Table-1. It is important to mention here functionally toilet is not fully ok but toilet user’s family 
members are using their toilet because some part of toilet is not directly related with available 
use.     
Table-1: Function related items observed through checklist  
 
Items # Function items 
18 Stair, Door, Floor of toilet, Sitting Pedestal, Faeces hole, Lid of faeces 
hole, Urination place, Anal washing place, Roof,  Urine drain pipe, 
Connection urine drain pipe and container, Urine container, Anal 
washing drain pipe, Evaporation bed, Gas pipe, Heat panel, Mortar of 
heat panel 
 
Table-2: Area-wise number of installed, functional and used EcoSan toilets in 2010  
 
Situation in 2010 
Toilet 
installation 
area 
Installed 
toilets  # 
Fully 
functional 
toilet #  
Fully 
functional 
toilet  %  
Used 
toilet # 
Used 
% 
Comilla 114 4 3.5 105 92 
Sharsha 20 8 40 18 90 
Keshabpur 40 26 65 37 93 
Sreepur 60 9 15 29 48 
Gheor 60 30 50 47 78 
Niamatpur 40 23 58 40 100 
Kolaroa 25 6 24 21 84 
Shyamnagar 25 7 28 19 76 
 
 
277 
 
Figure-3: 2010-2011 toilet monitoring trend 
3.2.  Toilet monitoring 
 
From August 2010, to until now the installed EcoSan toilets in rural areas of Bangladesh were 
monitored in monthly basis to find out the efficiency of toilets. A set format is used to collect 
monitoring data. Monitoring items are related with cleanliness, maintenance and availability of 
necessary materials. Monitoring related items are presented in the Table-3  
 
Table-3: Monitoring related items observed through checklist 
 
Items # Function items 
13 
Urination place, defecation place, anal washing place, toilet brush, urine 
container, ash pot, hole cover, proper use of ash, water/worm availability, 
flies availability, bad smelling, regular use of urine, evaporation bed 
 
3.3. 2010-1011 toilet monitoring situation 
 
Installed toilets are monitored at 
monthly basis. The following 
Figure-3 shows the over one year 
monitoring trend.All the 
significant parts related to 
cleanliness, necessary materials 
of toilet use and maintenance are 
checked. Index has been 
calculated using goodness % of 
each indicator. Here weight is 
considered same and 1 for all 
significant parts. Figure-3 Shows 
the index trend of areas over the 
period using equation 2. It is 
observed from the graph that the 
situation has improved gradually 
compared to the base period (August 2010). During rainy seasons sometimes found that some 
areas trend is down warding (Comilla, December 10; Gheor, June 11; Shymnagor July-Aug,11) 
and frequent oscillation exist almost in every areas. Comilla, Sharsha, Keshabpur and Niamatpur 
toilet situation are found very close to ideal situation. Although the situation of other areas are 
gradually improving months by months.  
 
Monitoring-model, SMj=∑Wi*Mij ……………………(2)  
 
Here, SMj: j-area’s score, Wi: item i’s weight, Mij: item i’s goodness (%), i=1,2,…13, j=1,2,….9 
 
 
278 
 
3.4.  Present situation of constructed toilet 
 
Using same function related items (table-1) was used at 2011 and observed through checklist to 
find out the present functionality status of toilet. Table-4 shows the present toilet functionality 
status at 2011. Here observed that 2011 toilet functional % are increased and it is minimum 60% 
in Gheor and maximum 100% in Sharsha where 2010 (table-2) it was minimum 3.5 % in Comilla 
and maximum 65 % in Keshabpur. Other hand found that in 2011 (table-4) maximum used toilet 
% is 100 in Sharsha and minimum used % is 60 in Gheor where it was maximum toilet used % 
100 in Niamotpur and minimum 48% toilet (table-2) was used in Sreepur in 2010. 
 
Table-4: Area-wise number of installed, functional and used EcoSan toilets in 2011 
 
Situation in 2011 Toilet 
installation area 
Installed 
toilets  # Fully functional 
toilet #  
Fully functional 
toilet  %  Used toilet # 
Used 
%  
Comilla 114 106 93.0 106 93 
Sharsha 20 20 100 20 100 
Keshabpur 40 37 92.5 37 93 
Sreepur 60 52 87 52 87 
Gheor 60 36 60 36 60 
Niamatpur 40 39 98 39 98 
Kolaroa 25 19 76 19 76 
Shyamnagar 25 18 72 18 72 
 
 
3.5.  CBO to improve sanitary improvement 
 
Community-based organization is non-profit, non political civil society that operates within a 
local community. They are essentially a subset of the wider group of nonprofits. Like other 
nonprofits they are often run on a voluntary basis and are self funding. Within community 
organizations there are many variations in terms of size and organizational structure. Some are 
formally incorporated, with a written constitution and a board of directors (also known as a 
committee), while others are much smaller and are more informal. For establishing an ideal 
sanitation management system in rural area CBO has starting a group of activity like toilet 
monitoring, support toilet users to repair their toilet, arrange campaign on toilet use maintenance 
and developing members capacity through training, meeting etc. In relation to adaptive model 
system evaluation of CBO activities are one of the major influencing factors to assess the 
sanitation improvement.  
 
3.5.1  Status of formed CBO 
  
In some areas, some difficulties are arising which is not possible to manage by the user family 
alone. For example, some users have limited farm land which is not enough to use all the urine 
279 
 
and dried feces separated from the toilet. CBO is thought to have potential to manage the existing 
situation, i.e. they can identify the potential users of that extra amount of urine and dried feces. 
Along with sanitation activities CBOs are working to provide their members some social demand 
like giving loan from their depositing money, arrange capacity development training for 
members, bank account open for depositing sharing money etc. Table-5 shows the time trajectory 
of commencement of CBO activity. Altogether 23 CBO have been formed in 23 villages of 9 
areas. Two CBO has newly formed in November, 11 at Niamptpur areas because two ethnic 
groups not attended in previously formed CBO meeting due to different norms and caste. In this 
paper these two CBOs activity is not considered.  
 
Table-5: Time trajectory of commencement of CBO activity and present status 
 
CBO members 
EcoSan toilet 
users 
Others users Sl
. 
N
o 
Area Name of CBO 
Commencem
ent time 
Total 
HH # Aug-
10 
Oct-
11 % Aug-10 Oct,11 
1 Raicho Aug,10 272 39 39 10
0 
81 81 
2 Hatigara Oct,10 268 28 28 10 57 57 
3 Bamail Oct,10 375 5 5 10 125 125 
4 Kalikapur Dec,10 465 14 14 10
0 
111 111 
5 Joypur-South Jan,11 114 14 14 10
0 
111 111 
6 
Comill
a 
Joypur-North Jan,11 165 14 14 10 96 96 
7 Chalkpara Mar,11 120 3 9 75 9 25 
8 
Sreepu
r Khondokar 
para Mar,11 150 7 20 83 10 38 
9 Dhulondi Jan,11 120 11 15 93 15 15 
10 Boro Dhulondi Jan,11 180 9 18 74 24 32 
11 
Gheor 
Amlopur 
Dhulondi Mar,11 80 10 10 77 26 26 
12 Tengra Oct,10 920 12 13 10
0 
60 71 
13 
Sharsh
a Samta Jan,11 825 4 7 10
0 
23 28 
14 Bashbaria Dec,10 570 22 23 96 135 149 
15 
Keshob
pur Roghurampur Jan,11 325 13 13 10
0 
50 59 
16 Kamarali Jan,11 500 3 7 87 49 55 
17 
Kolaro
a Ufapur Jan,11 650 8 14 87 157 168 
18 Soto Kuput Jan,11 300 7 10 76 57 75 
19 
Shymn
agor Kasimari Feb,11 720 5 9 75 47 58 
280 
 
CBO members 
EcoSan toilet 
users 
Others users Sl
. 
N
o 
Area Name of CBO 
Commencem
ent time 
Total 
HH # Aug-
10 
Oct-
11 % Aug-10 Oct,11 
20 Madhha Para Jan,11 113 6 10 53 7 12 
21 Mridha Para Jan,11 65 3 4 57 15 22 
22 Danga Para Nov,11  0 5 62 0 7 
23 
Niamot
pur 
Robidas Para Nov,11  0 4 80 0 15 
 
 
3.5.2  Activities of CBO to improve sanitation situation 
 
The authors supported the villagers to form CBO. One of the main objectives of CBO is to ensure 
proper sanitary management of EcoSan and other types of toilets. It has started activity first in 
Comilla area in August 2010. CBO has two types of member: executive and general. Executive 
members execute all the activities like monitoring of toilet, motivational activity, account 
management, monthly meeting, office keeping, etc and general members are the villager who 
supports CBO for successful implementation of those activities. At this moment all the CBO 
members are volunteer and are working for at least 6 months. Table-5 is showing that all the 
CBOs have started activity after March 2011 and in full phase. Some CBOs has started their 
activity at the end of 2010 and continuing. Different CBOs have taken different initiatives to 
improve the situation as well as their organization strength and capacity. For example, Keshabpur 
areas toilet had some construction fault and some parts of Comilla area toilets were 
malfunctioned for long use. CBO has initiated to repair the toilets. 
 
 
3.5.3  Classified the demands of CBO members 
 
General members of CBOs have some demands to CBO executive body for improving sanitation 
situation and solving their relevant problem. CBOs organize monthly meeting and that meeting 
they review the previous month activity, sharing the toilet monitoring result and setup the next 
month activity on the basis of monitoring result and members demand.   
   General members of CBO have many demands to CBO executive body which are related with 
their sanitation problem like help to repairing old toilet and construct new toilet, livelihood like 
savings members monthly sharing money in bank and some emergency need such as help at 
disaster time like flood, cyclone etc. From CBO monthly meeting records book sort out the 
general members demand. Followed Maslow's 1943 Hierarchy of Needs model, classified the 
members demand.  The following table shows the demand of toilet users and general members to 
CBO. 
 
 
281 
 
Table 6. Demand classification 
 
Beneficiary 
 Item 
Individual Community 
Giving teaching support at primary students to improve 
their  education level   ○ 
Giving loan to members from deposited money for 
income generating purpose   ○ 
Giving training on agricultural new technology like seed 
storing, new Varity cultivation    ○ 
Cooperation between CBO & Union Parisad   ○ 
Benefit campaign of safe environment among the 
villagers 
  ○ 
Arrange a Capacity development training for CBO 
members   ○ 
Establish a system for proper using EcoSan toilet market 
product   ○ 
Demonstrate an agricultural field to use EcoSan product 
for motivating local people   ○ 
LEVEL - i  
cooperation     
care           
Repairing of toilet used sharing money   ○ 
Bank account open for accounts management    ○ 
Monitoring of EcoSan toilet each other ○ ○ 
Office setup and provide office table and chair ○ ○ 
Arrange benefit campaign of urine and dried faeces   ○ 
Provide safe drinking water option  ○ ○ 
Construct easy used and low cost toilet ○ ○ 
LEVEL-ii  
demand     
concern         
social need 
Construct new EcoSan toilet ○ ○ 
Repairing of toilet ○   
Provide urine container, repair heat panel and hole cover ○   
LEVEL- iii 
requirement 
commitment   Arrange campaign on EcoSan toilet proper use and 
maintenance  ○   
 
From the above table it is very apparent that if the demands of level-3 and level-2 have been 
satisfied then henceforth increase the esteem needs. Now CBO are starting to work satisfying the 
demand level-3 and 2. According to users’ demand class calculate the CBOs activities score. 
CBO members demands are classified at three levels. Level-i consists cooperation care esteem, 
level-ii consists demand concern social need and level-iii consists requirement commitment 
physiological. The evaluation of CBO activities was done by using following method: 
282 
 
Figure-4: Trajectory of CBO activities  
 
CBO activities score = w1 ∑ level-i +w2∑ level-ii+w3∑level-iii ………………….(3) 
 
Weight of demand level is level-i w1 = +1, level ii w2 = 0 and level –iii w3= -1 
 
3.5.4  CBOs activities time trajectory  
 
Trajectory of CBO activities are 
calculating use of equation 3. From 
figure-4 it was found that strong 
CBO activities level has been 
improved month by month in 
Comilla, Kesabpur, Sharsha, 
Gheor, Sreepur and Kolaroa areas. 
Specially these areas CBO has 
taken the initiative to repair the 
toilet and inspired the EcoSan 
toilet owners to use the toilet for 
getting benefits. Niamotpur and 
shymnagor areas CBO activities is 
not satisfied because CBO has not yet taking any effective initiative to ensure the use of urine and 
dried feces in crop production. Shymnagor, Niamotpur and Geor areas’ low level CBO activity 
has also effect the monitoring results. Gradually improved CBO activities level can change the 
toilet situation expressly sanitary management of rural sanitation. 
 
3.6. CBOs activity and relationship with monitoring result  
 
Activities of CBO are major factors for improving sanitary management in rural areas. Strong 
and independent CBOs can take effective initiative to change the bad sanitation situation and 
established a Community Based Sanitation Management system through ensuring direct 
community participation at sanitary management.  
   
3.6.1  CBOs classification 
 
Considered CBOs activity and monitoring score classified the different areas’ CBOs. Table-7 
shows the CBO classification and characteristics. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
283 
 
Table 7: CBO classification 
 
Considered activities Activity Score CBO Area 
 Included 91-100 % EcoSan toilet users in CBO 
 Regular sharing money collection and deposit in bank 
 Using sharing money for toilet repairing 
 Regular supervised toilet monitoring   
 Supervised toilet repairing work  
Score > 4 
-Comilla 
-Sharsha 
-Keshabpur 
 
 
 Included 71-90 % EcoSan toilet users in CBO 
 Regular sharing money collection and deposit in bank 
 Regular supervised toilet monitoring 
 Supervised toilet repairing work 
4≤ Score >3 
-Sreepur 
-Gheor 
-Kolaroa 
 Included 50-70 % EcoSan toilet users in CBO 
 No sharing money collection  
 Not supervised toilet monitoring work 
Score ≤ 3 -Shymnagor -Niamotpur 
 
3.6.2   Relationship between CBO activity progress and monitoring result 
 
According to classification characteristics formed CBO has classified. Table 8 shows the area-
wise CBO class and their monitoring and activity score. 
 
Table 8: Area-wise CBOs activity and monitoring score in October 2011 
 
October,2011 
CBO 
Activity score Monitoring score 
Comilla 4.3 0.95 
Sreepur 3 0.84 
Gheor 4 0.92 
Sharsha 4.5 0.98 
Keshabpur 4.5 0.97 
Kolaroa 3.5 0.87 
Shymnagor 2.5 0.82 
Niamotpur 3 0.88 
 
 
 
 
 
284 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Members of CBO has many demands to CBO executive body for improving their sanitation 
facilities along with taking initiative to solve others relevant issues. But it is factual that newly 
formed CBO has not accomplished to execute the demand of all members. Management and 
leadership expertise, self-ruling financial ability and active participation of general members can 
be gradually strengthen CBOs action to achieve their target. General members of CBO has many 
demand to the members of the committee which is related to sanitation along with others social 
demands.CBO committee help to solve the problem according to the members demand within 
their limited financial ability. From table-8 it is found an activist relationship between CBO 
activity and toilet monitoring. Among the eight areas CBO Sharsha, Comilla and Keshabpur 
areas CBOs activity and monitoring score is best. Kolaroa Geor,and Sreepur areas CBOs activity 
progress is better than rest Shymnagor and Niamotpur areas. Other hand Kolaroa Geor, Sreepur 
and Niamotpur areas monitoring score is almost similar but previous time Niamotpur areas 
monitoring score is better than those areas. In case of Niamotpur it is very exceptional and 
different from others area, here odd relations are present between CBO activity progress and 
monitoring score. Behind this relation authors find out some reasons from field observations. 
From the beginning Niamotpur areas toilet users are almost properly used their toilet but urine 
used situation is not contented that’s why the monitoring results are fluctuated. Some related 
monitoring items like urine container, bad smell and excreta using negative answer has been 
decreased the total monitoring index. For improving that situation there were formed two CBOs 
in this village but that two CBOs have not covered the total villages. EcoSan toilet users two 
lower caste ethnic groups (Robidas para and Danga para) has not feel easy to joined to formed 
CBO. Also this two CBO has not creating any system to collect the members sharing money and 
not included all EcoSan toilet users under this CBO. Due to this CBO members don’t know the 
real situation and they could not take any initiative to change the situation. To overcome the 
situation local CBO members decided to form another two CBOs for those two lower caste ethnic 
groups inside their cluster to manage their sanitation option properly and also included all 
EcoSan toilet users gradually as a general members of CBO. 
  
 
 
Sharsha 
Keshobpur 
Comilla 
Geor 
Kolaroa 
Sreepur 
Shymnagor 
Niamotpur 
CBO- Activity Score 
M
on
ito
rin
g 
Sc
or
e 
Figure 5: Relationship between CBO activity and monitoring 
score 
285 
 
4.   Conclusion 
 
In this paper, the authors have tried to evaluate CBO activity as a tool of sanitary management of 
EcoSan toilets in rural Bangladesh. Although there was found improvement in toilet situation 
after the initiation of CBO activities, the improvement was not same and smooth in all the areas. 
Monitoring results reflect the best toilet situation in Sharsha, Keshabpur, Comilla, Geor and 
Kolara where CBOs are also working very actively. On the other side Shymnagor, Sreepur, and 
Niamotpur CBOs activity level is not to accomplish at satisfied level where monitoring result is 
also not satisfied.  Other hand it is observed that where CBO are strongly doing their activity 
that’s areas also improving the sanitary situation of toilet. So it is concluded that strong CBO 
activity can be one of the factors for improving the toilet sanitary situation. Functionality of CBO 
for longer period, how to support local upcoming sanitation demands are major challenges of this 
management model as sustainability of CBO as a nonprofit organization is rare in rural 
Bangladesh.  
 
Acknowledgements 
 
We are pleased to express profound respect, sense of gratitude, sincere appreciation to the 
villagers who formed CBO and are working for improving village sanitation. We once again 
thanks JICA to continuing to support rural peoples to improve their living status.  We recall the 
unforgettable support from JADE monitoring staff to helping us during the conduction of survey 
and CBO information collection from the field.  
 
References 
 
1. K. Takahashi, A. Sakai, A. Mamun, T. Ahmed and Q. Azaduzzaman: Evaluation of Benefit 
Related to Sanitary Improvement through the Eco-San Toilet in Rural Areas in Bangladesh, IWA 
Conference, 2011 
2. UNICEF, 14 October 2009. Global Hand-washing Day: 'Clean hands save lives' campaign, 
Dhaka. http://www.unicef.org/bangladesh/media_5737.htm 
3. Qazi Azad-uz-zaman, Md. Mosleh uddin Parvez,  Dr. Kunio Takahashi: Acceptability of 
EcoSan Toilets and   Monitoring Process under CBO Activity: Is it possible to maintain the 
EcoSan toilet by the users: 3rd JADE-JICA-DPHE informal seminar, Dhaka 2011 
 
 286 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
EVALUATION OF ECOSAN TOILET AS AN APPROPRIATE SANITATION OPTION 
FOR RURAL AREAS OF BANGLADESH IN LIGHT OF SANITARY IMPROVEMENT: 
A CASE STUDY 
 
 
Qazi Azaduzzaman1, Abdullah Al Mamun2 and Kunio Takahashi3 
 
 
ABSTRACT: The authors are implementing ecosan toilets in different rural areas of Camilla,  
Munshigonj, Jessore, Satkhira, Manikgonj, Gazipur, Naogaon since 2004. Ecosan toilet, the type 
is being installed is Urine Diverting Dry Toilet (UDDT). The authors have implemented research 
in different areas and condition in Bangladesh since 2005 and observed appropriate use of the 
toilet toilet can ensure various benefits: more agriculture production, less disease incidence, 
reduced medical expenses, etc. This study was carried out to evaluate ecosan toilet as an 
appropriate sanitation option for rural areas of Bangladesh in light of sanitary improvement. The 
authors have implemented questionnaire surveys and found that better situation is prevailing 
among user families compared to others regarding toilet situation, awareness and behavior related 
to toilet, prevalence of water borne disease and medical expenses. Medical expenditure are found 
less in user families compared to other toilet user families in all areas at the same time. 
1. Introduction 
There are still over 2.6 billion poor people don’t have improved  sanitation facilities around the 
globe, 72% of whom live in Asia says by JMP for water supply and sanitation. There are also 
significant disparities observed between urban and rural areas in regard to sanitation. Rural areas 
continue to have a lower percentage of population using improved sanitation and higher number 
of people have without improved facilities. In Bangladesh, water and sanitation (WATSAN) 
issues remain a big development challenge due to high rate of child mortality and wrecked health 
conditions. They have also shown that 47% of total population of Bangladesh don’t have access 
to improved sanitation facilities until 2008 although the coverage was 93% at the same time 
(WHO/UNICEF, 2010).  
The government has declared for universal sanitation coverage by 2013 to meet MDG target. The 
type, mostly installed in rural areas for universal sanitation coverage, is pit latrine. Inappropriate 
construction and maintenance of pit latrine can pollute surrounding environment specially water 
environment when it is constructed close to a water source like pond, canal, hand tube well, etc. 
 
 
1Japan Association of Drainage and Environment BD Office (JADE-B) 
2Bangladesh Academy for Rural Development (BARD) 
3Japan Association of Drainage and Environment Head Office (JADE-J), Tokyo, Japan  
 287 
An unhygienic environment related to inadequate human excreta management create health risk 
to local people. Diarrhea is by far the commonest illness in Bangladesh. According to WHO 
Facts and figures: Water, sanitation, and hygiene links to health, overall 1.8 million people die 
every year from diarrhoeal diseases (including cholera); 90% are children under 5, mostly in 
developing countries. 88% of diarrhoeal disease is attributed to unsafe water supply, inadequate 
sanitation and hygiene. 
 
Uses of chemical fertilizers are causing degradation in soil health gradually and the organic 
content of soil has substantially been decreased. According to Bangladesh Agriculture Research 
Council (BARC) NPK in the soil is depleting quite rapidly. The content of organic matter in the 
soil is now estimated at less than 1%, where the critical level is 3% (Philip Gain, et al. 2004).  In 
addition to soil deterioration, it is forecasted that keeping major nutrients, nitrogen and 
phosphorus, will not be easy in the near future. This situation will be threaten food productivity 
and will increase fertilizer cost. Therefore the necessity of utilizing human excreta as organic 
fertilizer is increasing. In the case of pit latrine, the valuable human excreta are being wasted 
(Hosaka, K. et al, 2006). 
Takahashi (2007, 2011) has shown that an appropriate human excreta management and utilizing 
human excreta relates to poverty alleviation through reducing health and increasing agricultural 
productivity. The EcoSan toilet, the type installed in Bangladesh is urine diverting dry toilet 
(UDDT) is capable to reduce burden on family finance, especially for the poor families, and 
break the vicious circle between poverty and unhygienic environment. A hypothesis model of 
improvement poverty by installation of EcoSan toilet is shown in figure-1.  
The authors have selected ecological sanitation and have installed about 400 toilets (referred to 
“EcoSan toilet” hereinafter) for household use. It has been installed in different districts of 
Bangladesh as, Comilla, Munshigonj, Manikgonj, Gazipur, Jessore Noagoan and Satkhira during 
2004 to 2008. So the toilets are being used at least for 3 years. In this study, the authors focus on 
the benefit related to sanitary improvement, reduction of water borne disease incidence and 
medical expenditure. 
Decrease of medical
expenditure
Increase of job
opportunity
Improvement of arsenic
contamination
Improvement of
transportation job
Increase of agricultural
product
**Change to
organic farming
Decrease of diseases
**Decrease of infant
mortality rate
Expansion of water
source
**The issue of arsenic
contamination
Decrease of chemical
fertilizer
Improvement of
course of diseases
Improvement of quality
of surface water & soil
Improvement of soil
condition
Appropriate using of
eco-san
Use human excreta as
fertilizer
Installment of eco-
san toilets
Focus in this study
** Main problem
Establishment of ecological villages
Improvement of family income
Improvement of agricultural production
Improvement of nutrient and health
Improvement of poverty
Improvement of surrounding environment
Figure 1 A hypothesis 
model of improvement 
poverty by installation 
of EcoSan toilet (Dr. 
Kunio Takahashi, 
 288 
2.Methods 
Questionnaire survey has been implemented July 2011 in every areas to drag the benefit related 
to sanitary improvement of EcoSan toilet use. The respondents are of 2 categories: users and 
others. Here user means user of EcoSan toilet and others means user of other toilet.Table-1 shows 
size of the sample and its area and category wise distribution. Every EcoSan user family has been 
surveyed in each area and at least same number of other toilet user family has been surveyed at 
the same time. The other toilet user families have been selected randomly and close to the user 
families. This is not following any standard survey methods, just based of the researchers’ choice 
and opportunity. Altogether 922 household have been surveyed of which 357 are user families 
(39%) and 565 families belong to others (61%). Fig.2 is showing the survey areas. 
 
Table 1 Distribution of samples 
                 
  
                        Figure 2 Survey areas 
(refer to world-atras.com.) (##*) is number of Eco-san toilet 
2.1 Questionnaire items  
i. Attribute (sex/age/education-level/occupation/land-ownership/household composition, 
frequency of flood etc.) 
ii. Situation of current toilet (type/situation/ willingness of improvement / improvement 
reason etc.) 
iii. Health/sanitary concept in living condition (recognition of disease frequency/ 
types/pollutant pathways/awareness/medical cost etc.)  
iv. Awareness and behavior on human excreta (management/transportation/disposal etc.) 
v. Knowledge and intention to use of human excreta (fertilizer and fuel gas use) 
vi. Willingness of improvement of living environment and satisfaction 
vii. Concern of daily life (medical service / worrying matter of life /satisfaction etc.) 
Area User Others Total 
Comilla 112 220 332 
Sharsha 20 20 40 
Keshabpur 37 43 80 
Sreepur 36 84 120 
Gheor 60 60 120 
Sreenagar 15 35 50 
Niamatpur 40 40 80 
Kolaroa 19 31 50 
Shyamnagar 18 32 50 
Total 357 565 922 
Niamotpur(40*) 
Comilla(114*) 
Sreepur(60*) 
Gheor (60*) 
Shyamnagar(25*) 
Kolaroa(25*) 
Keshabpur(40) 
Sharsha (20*) 
 289 
Figure 3 Conventional EcoSan Toilet implemented by the authors 
2.2. View point of analysis 
The following two viewpoints are introduced upon the analysis:  
 Comparison analysis between Eco-san toilet users and others. Here, the simple total 
tabulation result of each item is compared, and a feature result of dividing users and other 
is considered.  
 Structural analysis of related factor such as awareness and behavior of toilet, situation of 
toilet, reduction of water-borne diseases, and medical expenditure etc.  
3. Brief description of EcoSan toilet 
The EcoSan toilet (figure-3 and 4), the type installed is urine diverting dry toilet (UDDT). The 
toilet has two chamber for defecation. One chamber of a usual sized toilet can be used for six 
months by a six member family. And next six months the chamber is to keep closed for 
composting. This period people can use 2nd chamber. Usually ash is being used after defecation 
which intensify composting system. This toilet has separate space for anal washing. Urine, faeces 
and anal washing water are being divided at the sources. Later on urine and dried faeces are being 
used in agriculture field for crop production. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                      Faeces 
                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                           
 
 
 
 
 
 290 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
              
Figure 4 Drawing of convention EcoSan toilet 
4. Results of the survey  
Results obtained from the survey are shown through comparative analysis between users and 
others, and structural analysis among related factors. 
 291 
4.1. Comparative analysis between Eco-San toilet Users and Others  
The difference of the attribute of Eco-san toilet users and others is shown at the beginning of the 
analysis. Here sex and literacy rate of the respondents, main occupation, ownership of farm land 
And annual income of he household are shown (Fig.5). There is no big difference is observed 
between two categories. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5 The differences of some attribute factors between users and others 
Income distribution is observed very similar between two categories. Most of the respondents 
have income between taka 60,000 to 140,000. The respondents are mainly male and literate, their 
income is based on agriculture and business, and most of the cases they have farm land.  Al 
though these are not shown in figures most of the respondents are residing in their own house and 
at least for 10 years. About half of the families have joined micro credit and about same number 
of families are consuming electricity. Some areas such as Shyamnagar, Gheor, Kolaroa, and 
Sreenagar had to face flood under and above the floor level during past 10 years.  
 292 
Now the situation of toilet is being viewed by figure 6 which includes dirty and bad smelling 
state of toilet, dangerous or not when the children use the toilet without the help of the elder, 
usable or not during flood season and finally the users will keep the toilet using in the future.  
 
Figure 6 Situation of toilet 
Most of the EcoSan toilets are found not dirty and bad smelling where almost the reverse  
situation is prevailing in case of other toilet users.  About 75% of the EcoSan toilet remains 
usable during small flood where about 40% of other toilets remain usable during same situation. 
EcoSan toilet seems more dangerous for the children if the use alone compared to other toilets 
according to the respondents. About 95% of the EcoSan toilet users will continue to use their 
current toilet where 55% of the other toilet users are found to continue their current toilet.  
Next, awareness and behavior related to sanitation  will be shown in figure 7. In this regard the 
Respondents are asked that cleaning toilet and dipping up pit is dreadful job for them or not. 
About 30% of the user respondents think cleaning toilet is more or less a dreadful to them where 
more than 90% of the others toilet users respondents have same feeling regarding the jobs. Less 
number of user respondents think dipping up pit is a dreadful job for them compared to others 
toilet user respondents.  Same feature is obtained when they are asked ‘is it disgusting and dirty 
to convey human excreta?’ And ‘do you feel religious barrier to touch human excreta?’   
 293 
   
Figure 7 Awareness and behavior related to sanitation 
4.2 Structural analysis of related factors 
In this section association between related factors will be shown by using χ2 - test. Result will be 
shown at .1%, 1% and 5% level of significance. The factors are shown in table-2 and their 
association in fig.8. It is assumed that satisfaction related to sanitation comes when the toilet has 
ability to reduce water born disease incidence, number of patient and finally to reduce medical 
expenditure.  These state of medical cost is related to toilet situation, maintenance and behavior 
on human excreta. Type of toilet and knowledge of proper use are related with toilet situation, 
maintenance, etc and type of toilet is related to education, availability of farm land and 
participation to CBO activity.  Religious is related to behavior on human excreta. 
Satisfaction
Water-borne 
disease
Maintenance
Bad smell Dirty Frequency 
cleaning
Dipping is 
dreadful
Convey 
excreta
Knowledge 
of proper use
Toilet type
religious 
barrier
Educational 
level
Participating 
CBO
Land owner
Medical household economy burden 
Medical 
expenditure
No. of patients
Toilet situation Avoidance to human excreta
Satisfaction P<=0.001
P<=0.01
P<=0.05
Water-borne 
disease
Maintenance
Bad smell Dirty Frequency 
cleaning
Dipping is 
dreadful
Convey 
excreta
Knowledge 
of proper use
Toilet type
religious 
barrier
Educational 
level
Participating 
CBO
Land owner
Medical household economy burden 
Medical 
expenditure
No. of patients
Toilet situation Avoidance to human excreta
Figure 8 Assumed and observed model of related factors of sanitary improvement 
 294 
Table 2 The hypothesized factors related to sanitary improvement 
 
It is found that types of toilet is very highly associated with dirty state of toilet, understanding 
proper use of toilet, number of patients, medical expenses of water borne disease, frequency of 
cleaning toilet, convey excreta, and with religious barrier. Proper use of toilet is very highly 
associated with medical expenditure, frequency of cleaning toilet, feeling to convey excreta, and 
religious barrier.  
Area wise structure model of factors and comparison among them are shown in figure 9. 
Keshabpur Sharsha 
  
Kolaroa Shyamnagar 
Are you satisfied with your 
current life? 
Dirty How the frequency of cleaning 
toilet? 
Educational level Do you understand proper 
use of your toilets? 
Do you think it is disgusting and 
dirty to convey excreta? 
Do you have own farm land? In a year 2010-2012, the 
number of patients 
Do you feel a religious barrier to 
touch human excreta? 
Choose the toilet that you 
mainly use everyday 
In a year 2010-2012, the 
medical expenses 
 Are you participating in the CBO 
activity? 
Satisfaction P<=0.001
P<=0.01
P<=0.05
Water-borne 
disease
Maintenance
Bad smell Dirty Frequency 
cleaning
Dipping is 
dreadful
Convey 
excreta
Knowledge 
of proper use
Toilet type
religious 
barrier
Educational 
level
Participating 
CBO
Land owner
Medical household economy burden 
Medical 
expenditure
No. of patients
Toilet situation Avoidance to human excreta
Satisfaction P<=0.001
P<=0.01
P<=0.05
Water-borne 
disease
Maintenance
Bad smell Dirty Frequency 
cleaning
Dipping is 
dreadful
Convey 
excreta
Knowledge 
of proper use
Toilet type
religious 
barrier
Educational 
level
Participating 
CBO
Land owner
Medical household economy burden 
Medical 
expenditure
No. of patients
Toilet situation Avoidance to human excreta
 295 
 
 
Gheor Sreepur 
  
Niamatpur Comilla 
Satisfaction P<=0.001
P<=0.01
P<=0.05
Water-borne 
disease
Maintenance
Bad smell Dirty Frequency 
cleaning
Dipping is 
dreadful
Convey 
excreta
Knowledge 
of proper use
Toilet type
religious 
barrier
Educational 
level
Participating 
CBO
Land owner
Medical household economy burden 
Medical 
expenditure
No. of patients
Toilet situation Avoidance to human excreta
Satisfaction P<=0.001
P<=0.01
P<=0.05
Water-borne 
disease
Maintenance
Bad smell Dirty Frequency 
cleaning
Dipping is 
dreadful
Convey 
excreta
Knowledge 
of proper use
Toilet type
religious 
barrier
Educational 
level
Participating 
CBO
Land owner
Medical household economy burden 
Medical 
expenditure
No. of patients
Toilet situation Avoidance to human excreta
Satisfaction P<=0.001
P<=0.01
P<=0.05
Water-borne 
disease
Maintenance
Bad smell Dirty Frequency 
cleaning
Dipping is 
dreadful
Convey 
excreta
Knowledge 
of proper use
Toilet type
religious 
barrier
Educational 
level
Participating 
CBO
Land owner
Medical household economy burden 
Medical 
expenditure
No. of patients
Toilet situation Avoidance to human excreta
Satisfaction P<=0.001
P<=0.01
P<=0.05
Water-borne 
disease
Maintenance
Bad smell Dirty Frequency 
cleaning
Dipping is 
dreadful
Convey 
excreta
Knowledge 
of proper use
Toilet type
religious 
barrier
Educational 
level
Participating 
CBO
Land owner
Medical household economy burden 
Medical 
expenditure
No. of patients
Toilet situation Avoidance to human excreta
 296 
Satisfaction P<=0.001
P<=0.01
P<=0.05
Water-borne 
disease
Maintenance
Bad smell Dirty Frequency 
cleaning
Dipping is 
dreadful
Convey 
excreta
Knowledge 
of proper use
Toilet type religious 
barrier
Educational 
level
Participating 
CBO
Land owner
Medical household economy burden 
Medical 
expenditure
No. of patients
Toilet situation Avoidance to human excreta
 Satisfaction P<=0.001
P<=0.01
P<=0.05
Water-borne
disease
Maintenance
Bad smell Dirty
Frequency
cleaning
Dipping is
dreadful
Convey
excreta
Toilet type
Knowledge of
proper use
Educational
level
Participating
CBO
Land owner
Medical household economy burden 
Toilet situation Avoidance to human excreta
Medical
expenditure
No. of patients
 
 
Figure 9 Area wise factor structure model 
The basis of this structure model is the significant relationship between factors. In case of 
Keshabpur area it is found that satisfaction is highly associated with medical related household 
economy burden. This kind of association is absent in other areas. It is also observed that 
maintenance of toilet is strongly related with religious barrier in Keshabpur and Gheor areas. This 
kind of relation is absent in other areas. Very strong association between knowledge of proper 
use of toilet and types are found frequently in different areas.  
5. Benefit of sanitary improvement in light of medical expenditure 
5.1 Comparison among categories 
Area wise distribution of patient of water borne diseases and medical expenses of last 1 year 
(2010 -2011) are shown in figure 10. It  is found that the number of patients is less in user 
families compared to others observed in Keshabpur, Kolaroa, Sharsha and Sreepur areas. Similar 
distribution is observed between users and others families in Gheor and Niamatpur areas. 
Medical expenditure are found less in user families compared to other toilet user families in every 
areas.  
Area Number of patients (water borne diseases) Medical expenditure 
Keshabpur 
  
 297 
Kolaroa 
  
Gheor 
  
Niamatpur 
 
 
Sharsha 
  
 298 
Shyamnagar 
  
Sreepur 
  
Figure 10 Distribution of medical expenditure and number of patient: Area wise  
5.2 Comparison among two time points (Comilla) 
 
Figure 11 shows the number of patients and the medical expenditure between eco-san toilet user 
and other toilet user. Figure shows that the eco-san toilet brings the benefit of sanitary 
improvement in drastic form.  
 
2009 2011 
 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
zero 1 person 2 persons 3 persons 4 persons>
Users Others
 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
1person 2persons 3persons
user others
 
Figure 11(1) The number of patients between eco-san toilet user and others 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 299 
2009 2011 
 
0
20
40
60
80
100
0≦ 1000 3000 6000 9000 9000≧
Users Others
  
Figure  11(2) The medical expenditure between eco-san toilet user and others 
 
6.Conclusion 
Although the attributes are found similarly distributed both in user and other families, differences 
are observed between two categories in case of toilet use, awareness and behavior related to 
sanitation. All of the cases, EcoSan toilet users situation are found superior to other toilet users 
situation. 
Number of patients of water borne diseases and medical expenditure of those diseases are 
compared between EcoSan toilet user families and other toilet user families. Better situation is 
observed prevailing among user families compared to others. EcoSan toilets are found to have 
effect on sanitary improvement from this study. 
A hypothesis is set among the factors keeping in mind about sanitary improvement related to 
toilet use. The association between factors are observed not similar in every areas.   
Reference:  
WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Programme for Water Supply and Sanitation – update on 2010 
(page-6, 39) 
WHO| Facts and figures: Water, sanitation, and hygiene links to health 
Philip Gain, et al. 2004 Bangladesh Environment: Facing the 21st Century, page-55 
Hosaka,K, Takahashi,K. Sakai,A. and Takamura,S: A study on installation of eco-san toilets at 
rural areas in Bangladesh, Environmental & Sanitary Engineering Research, Vol20. No.3, 
2006  
Takahashi,K. Sakai,A and Tofayel A : An Effect and Benefit Evaluation of Sanitation 
Improvement through Eco-San Toilet Installation for Rural Area in Bangladesh, Proceeding 
of 9th JADE’s Conference, 2007 
K. Takahashi, A. Sakai, A. Mamun, T. Ahamed and Q. Azaduzzaman: Evaluation of Benefit 
Related to Sanitary Improvement through the Eco-San Toilet in Rural Areas in Bangladesh, 
IWA Conference, 2011 
 300 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
ELECTRICITY GENERATION VIA MICROBIAL FUEL CELLS USING CATION 
EXCHANGE RESIN: A NEW APPROACH 
 
 
Maksudur R. Khan1, M. S. A. Amin2, M. R. Karim3, T. K. Deb4 and  Kaniz Ferdous5 
 
 
ABSTRACT: Renewable energy is an increasing need in our society. Microbial fuel cell (MFC) 
technology represents a new technology for the regeneration of electricity from what would 
otherwise be considered waste and can be a vital candidate for energy in this respect. Electricity 
directly generated by using bacteria while accomplishing wastewater treatment in MFC 
processes. The present study deals with performance of proton exchange membrane and cation 
exchange resin for ion transfer. The effect of dimension of Resin Bridge on electricity generation 
and COD removal was reported. A maximum voltage of 10.5 mV was observed at 400ppm of 
KMnO4 along with 400ml of dairy in an anode chamber. Average COD removal was in the range 
of 70% to 90%.  
Keywords: Microbial fuel cells (MFC); Dairy waste; Voltage; Power density; Current density; 
cation exchange resin. 
 
 
1.Introduction 
 
Day by day, gradual industrialization and urbanization leading more production of waste material 
and exposing it to the environment. Microbial fuel cell (MFC) can be a suitable solution to this 
problem. A MFC is a device that converts chemical energy to electrical energy with the aid of the 
catalytic reaction of microorganisms (Allen et al., 1993, Kim et al., 1999). MFC generates 
electricity directly from various biodegradable substrates through microbial release of electrons 
to an electrode. Microbial fuel cells can be used to recover energy from wastewater while 
eliminating the need for wastewater aeration and reducing sludge production [1, 2Several types 
of wastewater have been examined in such process including food processing, municipal, 
brewery, animal and paper recycling wastewaters (Liu et al., 2004; Logan et al. 2005). 
 
                                                        
1Professor, Department of Chemical Engineering and Polymer Science, SUST, Sylhet,Bangladesh. 
mrkhancep@yahoo.com 
2Lecturer, Department of Chemical Engineering and Polymer Science, SUST, Sylhet, Bangladesh. 
saikat_cep@yahoo.com 
3Under-graduate research Student, Department of Chemical Engineering and Polymer Science, SUST, 
Sylhet, Bangladesh. rezasustcep48@gmail.com 
4Under-graduate research Student, Department of Chemical Engineering and Polymer Science, SUST, 
Sylhet, Bangladesh. tannmoy_cep@yahoo.com 
5 PhD Student, Department of Chemical Engineering and Polymer Science, SUST, Sylhet, Bangladesh.  
 301 
An MFC consists of anode and cathode equipped with a suitable ion exchange media (such as 
membrane, resin. etc.).The anode chamber is inoculated with microbial colloni.  Bacteria gain 
energy by transferring electrons from an electron donor, such as glucose or acetate, to an electron 
acceptor, such as oxygen. The larger the difference in potential between donor and acceptor, the 
larger the energetic gain for the bacterium, and generally the higher the growth yield. In a 
microbial fuel cell (MFC), bacteria do not directly transfer their electrons to their characteristic 
terminal electron acceptor, but these electrons are diverted towards an electrode, i.e. an anode. 
The electrons are subsequently conducted over a resistance or power user towards a cathode and 
thus, bacterial energy is directly converted to electrical energy (Rao et al. 1976) 
 
In this study attempts were made to develop a mediator-less MFC with using a cation exchange 
resin and comparative study with the ion exchange membrane.  
 
2. EXPERIMENTAL 
 
2.1 Cell feed: 
The fuel for the cell used was The waste water from dairy [Fulkoli,BISIC,Khadim ,Sylhet] and 
selected on the basis that it was not sterilised . It was collected and kept in air tight container for 
10 days. Then the liquid from it was used as microbial source in the MFC in anode chamber.  
 
2.2 Cell reactor design 
The fuel cell reactor was tested as a batch system, similar to a battery. The reactor was 
constructed in the laboratory using available local PET bottle. Total volume of both anode and 
cathode compartment was the same (0.5 L) and each chamber was provided with sample port, 
wire point inputs (top), inlet and outlet ports as shown in Figure 1(a-b).The microbial cells were 
introduced on the anode chamber of the reactor, in which was located the anode.  
   The reactor also equipped with a tubular contact by a packed bed of cation exchange resin for 
the transfer of H+. The resin beds were constructed from hard plastic tubing, with different 
internal diameter & length. Both anode and cathode electrodes were made of graphite rod 
obtained from local dry cell factory and were positioned at a distance of 2 cm on either side of the 
membrane. Each electrode had a surface area of 25.635 sq. cm (both anode and cathode). Prior to 
use, the electrodes were soaked in de-ionized water for a period of 24 h. Contact between 
electrodes and copper wires was sealed with epoxy material. MFC was operated in batch mode at  
room temperature (28 ± 2°C). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1(a-b): Construction of MFC 
 302 
A few important technical details are enlisted below: 
 
Volume of anode and cathode chamber : 0.5 Liter 
Electrode material (both anode and cathode) : Graphite rod 
Surface area of a single electrode : 25.635 cm2 
Operating temperature : Room temperature  
Anode inoculums : Mixed anaerobic consortia 
Mediator – anode : Nil 
Mediator – cathode : Nil 
Proton exchange membrane : Nil 
Proton exchange system : Ion exchange resin 
Operating condition : Anaerobic 
Feeding nature : Batch 
 
 
2.3 Voltage and Current Measurement 
 
2.3.1 Voltage measurement 
Voltage was measured by connecting the voltmeter (Multi-meter) in parallel with the external 
resistance of the MFC system. Note that substrate containing cell is anode and oxidant containing 
cell is cathode. The process is shown in figure 2. 
 
Figure 2: Voltage measurement 
2.3.2 Current measurement 
Current was measured by connecting the ammeter (Multi-meter) in series with the external 
resistance of the MFC system. The measuring process is shown in figure 3. 
MFC 
- + 
Resistor 
V 
303 
 
 
Figure 3: Current measurement 
2.4 Current Density and Power Density Calculation 
 
2.4.1 Current Density Calculation 
By the ammeter, current was recorded every hour with a fixed resistance. Then the current 
density (A/m2) calculated by the following equation: 
Current Density, 
                              j= I/A 
Here, I= current and A= projected surface sectional area of the electrode. 
 
2.4.2 Power Density Calculation 
The voltage difference between the anode & cathode (V) was recorded at regular interval using a 
precise multi-meter. Power density (W/m2) was calculated according to the following equation: 
Power Density,  
                               P=IV/A        
Where I is the current, V is the voltage and A is projected surface area of the electrode.  
 
2.5 COD Measurement 
2.5.1 Required Chemicals: 
1. Potassium dichromate, K2Cr2O7 
2. Concentrated sulfuric acid, H2SO4 
3. Silver sulfate, Ag2SO4 
4. Mohr’s salt (ferrous ammonium sulfate hexahydrate), Fe(NH4)2(SO4)2.6H2O 
A 
MFC 
- + 
Resistor 
304 
 
5. 1,10-phenanthroline monohydrate 
 
2.5.2 Reagent Preparation: 
 
1. Preparation of standard K2Cr2O7 digestion solution (0.0167M) :  
0.4913g K2Cr2O7 (preheated at 103oC for 2hr) in 50ml distilled water + 16.7ml H2SO4 + 
3.33g HgSO4 + cool + dilute to 100ml 
2. Sulfuric acid reagent preparation :  
0.275g AgSO4 + 7ml H2SO4 (it takes 1-2 days to dissolve the silver into sulfuric acid) 
3. Preparation of Ferrion indicator :  
0.7425g 1, 10-phenanthroline monohydrate + 0.347g FeSO4 in distilled water and dilute 
to 50ml 
4. Preparation of standard ferrous ammonium sulfate (FAS) titrant, approximately 
0.1M :  
3.92g Fe(NH4)2(SO4)2.6H2O in distilled water + 2ml conc H2SO4.+ cool and dilute to 100 
ml 
 
2.5.3 Procedure 
 
1. The ampoules and the caps were washed with 20% H2SO4 to prevent contamination. 
2. The following solutions were taken in the 10ml ampoule: 2.5ml sample (diluted enough) 
+ 1.5ml digestion solution + 3.5ml H2SO4 reagent. 
3. The ampoules were sealed and shaked vigorously to mix it well. 
4. These ampoules were heated in oil bath at 145-155OC for 2hr. 
5. After heating the ampoules, they were cooled at room temperature and shaked. 
6. Then the solutions were taken into a conical flask and titrated with FAS standard solution 
(this solution was made when step 1 to 5 are completed) by adding 1-2 drops Ferrion 
indicator. These were titrated until the color changed (when indicator used it becomes 
blue green to reddish brown, after titration reddish brown color changes into blue green 
color.) 
7. In the same manner, a blank containing the reagent and a volume of distilled water equal 
to that of the sample was titrated. 
 
COD as mg O2 per liter =  X dilution factor 
 
Where,  
b = ml FAS used for blank 
s = ml FAS used for sample 
M = molarity of FAS 
 
 
 
305 
 
3. Result & Discussion 
 
3.1 Performance of proton exchange membrane and resin 
 
To scrutinized the performance between PEM and cation exchange Resin for ion transfer media 
in different  MFCs were operated. Both MFC used same waste water in anode chamber and same 
quantity of KMnO4 in cathode chamber. 
 
Figure 3.1we observes the performance of current generation between proton exchange 
membrane and cation exchange resin. Figure displayed that the generation of current with respect 
to time via PEM/ Resin. The figure shows that the initial current given by PEM is higher and 
gradually decreases where that for the resin is approximately steady at initial state with increment 
at higher time. 
 
 
Figure 4 : Comparison between current generated by PEM & resin.(when 400 ml  dairy waste 
water  in anode and 400 ppm of KMnO4 in cathode at the room temperature over 144 hours 
operation and current measured using 10 Ω resistance) 
3.2  Performance of close circuit Vs open circuit 
Performance of open and closed circuit operation in batch mode were operated. In this 
experiment 400ml dairy waste water used in anode chamber and 400ppm KMnO4 in cathode 
chamber. The MFC was run in 48 hours and gave higher 31µA current after 31 hours. Figure 4 
shows the open circuit operation has an abnormal increment and decrement at the initial state 
with an ultimate higher current while closed circuit operation shows a gradual decrement. As a 
result, further experiment were conducted by using cation exchange resin for ion transfer media.  
 
306 
 
 
Figure 5: current generation data of an open and closed circuit system (when 400 ml dairy waste 
water in anode and 400  ppm of KMnO4 in cathode at the room temperature over 48 hours 
operation and current measured using 10 Ω resistance) 
3.3  Effect of length of resin bed with constant diameter 
To know the effect of cation exchange bed length three MFC used which length was 5.5 cm, 
3.7cm and 2.5 cm respectively with constant diameter. Figure 6 shows the current generation is 
increased for greater bed length on the on the other hand lower bed length shown lower current.  
 
 
Figure 6 : current generation data of different bed length with constant diameter( when 400 ml  
dairy waste water  in anode and 400 ppm of KMnO4 in cathode at the room temperature over 49 
hours operation and current measured using 10 Ω resistance) 
3.4   COD removal 
A COD removal of in the range of 70% to 89% for the cells containing 300, 400 mL of waste 
water with  400 ppm, 500ppm KMnO4 in cathode chamber.  
307 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7 : Percent removal of COD in terms of time (When 400 ml waste water in anode and 
400ppm of KMnO4 maintained in cathode at room temperature over 145 hrs. operation) 
 
So, the removal of COD is found to be higher for the cell which showed higher current 
production. 
 
3.5   Power curve for different bed diameter 
 
The polarization curve characterizes the cell voltage as a function of current. The current, in turn, 
depends on the size of the electrical load placed across the fuel cell. In essence the polarization 
curve shows the electrochemical efficiency of the fuel cell at any operating current. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8 : Power density vs. current density curve for three MFCs using variable resin length 
At first, the power densities showed an incremental trend with increasing external resistance. But 
after reaching a peak value, the power densities begin to fall down with increasing resistance and 
308 
 
current density. Current generation showed decreasing trend with increase in resistance and is 
consistent with the reported literature (Venkantaet el., 2006), which indicated a typical fuel cell 
behavior. 
 
4.  Conclusion 
 
In this study the performance of cation exchange resin instead of proton exchange membrane as 
an ion transfer media for microbial fuel cell was investigated. It is notable that the price of proton 
exchange membrane is very much higher and difficult to regenerate than ion exchange resin. Also 
the macro porous nature of the resin used in these study facilities the ion exchange kinetics. 
Microbial Fuel cell was fabricated and constructed with local markets materials .It has been 
observed that the current generation of a MFC increased for higher cross-sectional area of resin 
bed. The result concludes that for lower anode chamber’s pH gives higher current generation 
comparing the result with current generation, a specific trend was found and shown in the result 
and discussion section. Due to the ohm resistances, sharp drop in the voltage was observed with 
the increase of the current density. This indicates the external resistances in electrode, connecting 
weir, circuit etc. were dominated in the MFC efficiency. Concentration polarization was found to 
be negligible. Some affect of activation polarization was observed. The removal of COD is found 
to be higher for the cell which showed higher current density. The highest COD removal was 
found 90.65%% for the cell containing 3.7 cm bed length with 400ml dairy waste water in anode 
chamber and 400ppm KMnO4 in cathode chamber. Also maximum power density was recorded 
as 1.616mW/m2 at the current density .022703A/m2 for the MFC cell containing 400ml dairy 
waste water in anode chamber and 400ppm KMnO4 in cathode chamber with 3.5cm bed dia. 
 
References 
 
Allen, R.M., Bennetto, H.P, (1993). Microbial fuel-cells: electricity production from 
carbohydrates. Appl. Biochem. Biotechnol, 40:27–40. 
Kim, B.H., Ikeda, T., Park, H.S., Kim, H.J., Hyun, M.S., Kano, K., Takagi, K., Tatsumi H., 
(1999). Electrochemical activity of an Fe (III)-reducing bac- terium, Shewanellaputrefaciens IR-
1, in the presence of alternative electron acceptors. Biotechnol. Tech., 13:475–478. 
Liu, H., Ramnarayanan, R.  and Logan, B.E., (2004). Production of electricity during wastewater 
treatment using a single chamber microbial fuel cell, Environ. Sci. Technol., 38:2281–2285. 
Oh S. and Logan, B.E. (2005). Hydrogen and electricity production from a food processing 
wastewater using fermentation and microbial fuel cell technologies. Water Res., 39: 4673–4682. 
Rao, J. R.; Richter, G. J.; Von Sturm, F.; Weidlich, E., (1976). The performance of glucose 
electrodes and the characteristics of different biofuel cell constructions. Bioelectrochem. 
Bioenerg., 3: 139-150. 
Venkanta Mohan, S., Saravanan, R., Veer Raghavulu, S., Mohanakrishna, G. and Sarma, P. 
N.,(2006) 
Bioelectricity production from wastewater treatment in dual chambered microbial fuel cell 
(MFC) using selectively enriched mixed microflora: Effect of catholyte. Bioresour. Technol., doi: 
10-1016/j.biotech.12.026.
 
309 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
TEMPERATURE DEPENDENDT BARRIER HEIGHT ANALYSIS OF NISI (N-TYPE) 
SCHOTTKY CONTACT WITH THE TUNNELING EFFECT 
 
 
Dr. Muhammad Khaled Husain1, Md. Shazzad Hossain2 and Md. Ismail Hossain3  
 
 
ABSTRACT: We have shown that the current-voltage (I-V) method of analyzing the barrier 
height for Ni-Si (n-type) Schottky contact and the temperature dependence of the Schottky barrier 
with temperature ranging from 30K-300K. The evaluation of simulated data reveals that an 
increase of zero-bias barrier height but a decrease of ideality factor n with increasing temperature. 
According to thermionic emission mechanism, Simulated results also shows that at higher doping 
reverse bias current increases due to tunneling effect. 
 
Keywords: Barrier height, Schottky contact, Thermionic emission, Tunneling effect, Ideality 
factor, Current-voltage method.  
 
1.  Metal-Semiconductor Contact and energy-band relation 
  
When metal is making contact with a semiconductor, a schottky barrier will be formed at the 
metal-semiconductor interface and the Fermi-level in the two materials must be coincident at 
thermal equilibrium. The Fig-1 shows the electronic energy relations at an ideal contact between 
a metal and n-type semiconductor in the absence of surface states. At far left, the metal and 
semiconductor are not in contact, and the system is not in thermal equilibrium. If a wire is 
connected between the semiconductor and the metal so that charge will flow from the 
semiconductor to the metal and thermal equilibrium is established, the Fermi levels on both sides 
line up. Relative to the Fermi level in the metal, the Fermi level in the semiconductor is lowered 
by an amount equal to the difference between two work functions. The work function is the 
energy difference between the vacuum level and the Fermi level. This quantity is denoted by 
ɸmfor the metal, and equal to (χ + Vn) in the semiconductor, where χ is the electron affinity 
measured from the bottom of the conduction band Ec to the vacuum level, and Vn is the energy 
difference between Ec and the Fermi level. The potential difference [ɸm- (χ + Vn)] is called the 
contact potential. As the distance δ decreases, an increasing negative charge is built up at the 
metal surface. An equal and opposite charge (positive) must exist in the semiconductor. Because 
of the relatively low carrier concentration, this positive charge is distributed over a barrier region 
near the semiconductor surface. When δ is small enough to be comparable with interatomic 
                                                        
1Research Associate, Nano group/Southampton Nanofabrication centre, Faculty of applied and physical 
science, University of Southampton, Southampton, UK. 
2Md.Shazzad Hossain, IC Layout Engineer, Ulkasemi, Dhaka, Bangladesh. 
3Md.Ismail Hossain, IC Layout Engineer, Ulkasemi, Dhaka, Bangladesh. 
 
310 
 
distances, the gap become transparent to electrons, and we obtain the limiting case, as shown on 
the far right (Fig -1). It is clear that the limiting value of the barrier height ɸBn is given by: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Energy band diagrams of metal-semiconductor contacts 
 
The barrier height is simply the difference between the metal work function and the electron 
affinity of the semiconductor. For an ideal contact between a metal and a n-type semiconductor, 
the barrier height ɸBn is given by: 
 
  
For a given semiconductor and for any metals, the sum of the barrier heights on n-type and p-type 
substrates is thus expected to be equal to the bandgap or  
 
 
It is clear from the above discussion that when a metal is bought into intimate contact with a 
semiconductor, the conduction and valence bands of the semiconductor are bought into a definite 
energy relationship with the Fermi level in the metal. Once this relationship is known, it serves as 
a boundary condition on the solution of the Poisson equation in the semiconductor, which 
proceeds in exactly the same manner as in p-n junctions. The energy -band diagrams for metals 
on both n-type and p-type materials are shown, under different biasing conditions, in Figure2. 
 
2. Thermionic emission theory 
 
The fundamental flat band barrier of the metal semiconductor system is a property of the 
interface, and arises from the contact potential between the metal and the semiconductor. 
However, is has been shown [9-14] that the barrier height of Schottky barrier diodes (SBDs) is 
strongly electric field dependent. Effects such as image force lowering, thermally assisted 
tunneling, recombination and surface state penetration etc. will lead to a dependence of the 
barrier height on the applied bias. In this paper, we have determined the zero electric filed flat-
band barrier height of n-type Nickel silicide (NiSi) SBDs by combining the measured barrier 
height at zero bias and the ideality factor determined by measurement of the forward biased I-V 
curve. Moreover, highly doped Si is used to enable tunneling currents. I-V measurements are 
performed for three different doping densities using tunneling theory for schottky barriers. 
Electrodeposited NI-Si SBs with lowly doped Si (nSi) exhibit a high quality schottky barrier with  
311 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2: Energy-band diagram of metal n-type and p-type semiconductors under different 
biasing conditions (a) Thermal equilibrium (b) Forward bias (c) Reverse bias 
 
very low leakage. In the work presented here electrodeposited Ni-Si contacts using highly doped 
Si (n+ Si) to activate tunneling were simulated and characterized.  The results are analyzed and 
compared with those of lowly doped Si. Simulated results are compared with experimental results 
[5] and it is found that the agreement is good. It is shown that, contrary to the case of lowly 
doped Si where thermionic emission dominates, tunneling is the dominant mechanism for reverse 
bias for highly doped Si. The reverse bias I-V behavior Which shows an increase in current with 
increasing bias due to tunneling for the higher doping and for low doping the reverse current is 
flat (low), showing no bias dependence. According to the thermionic emission theory for SBs the 
current density JTE versus applied potential (V) characteristics is described by the following 
equations[3]: 
 
 
 
 
where JS,TE is the thermionic  emission saturation current density, T is the absolute temperature, 
Vt=kT/q (here q is the elementary charge and k is the Boltzman Constant) and A** = 120m*/m 
(Acm-2K-2) is the effective Richardson Constant with m* and m being the effective and the free 
electron mass respectively. ɸBn is the Schottky barrier height: 
312 
 
 
 
 
 
where ɸB0 is the barrier height at zero bias  and ɛs is the dielectric constant of the semiconductor. 
Emax is the maximum electric field in the depletion region given by: 
 
 
 
Here, ND is the semiconductor doping concentration and ζ = Vt. ln(NC/ND).NC is the effective 
density of states at the bottom of the conduction band. Recent models for thermionic emission 
assume a spatial distribution of the barrier height to take interface inhomogeneities into account 
[7]. If ɸB0 and σS are the mean value and the standard deviation of the distribution respectively, 
the barrier height will have a temperature dependence which can be described by the following 
equation: 
 
 
3.  Method of analysis 
 
The basic equation used for the determination of Schottky barrier height is provided by 
thermionic emission theory and is of the form[9-11]: 
 
 
 
Where, a=diode area; A**= effective Richardson Constant; T = Absolute Temperature; 
k=Boltzman Constant; q=elecrtronic charge; = ɸB barrier height. 
However, , the barrier height of the SBDs is strongly dependent on the electric field in the 
depletion region and thus also on the applied bias. The barrier is reduced as a result of image 
force lowering and other effects caused by the applied bias. The effective barrier which is 
actually "seen" by the holes is used in place of ɸB and is defined as: 
 
 
 
Where, ɸB0= Barrier Height at zero bias; (δФe/δV) = change in the effective barrier with bias 
voltage. We assume that (δФe/δV) is a positive constant over the region of our measurement. 
Denoting (δФe/δV) by β,eqn(9) is modified to be: 
 
 
Where 
 
 
 
Writing 1/n = 1- β= 1- (δФe/δV), eqn (11) can be expressed as: 
 
 
 
 
313 
 
 
The parameter n is the well known ideality factor, and is a measure of conformity of the diode to 
pure thermionic emission is occurring. However, n usually has a value greater than unity. We 
shall discuss this in more detail later. For forward bias V>3kT/q, the second term in the eqn(13) 
and "-1"in eqn(11) become insignificant. Thus, it is justifiable to assume the measured barrier 
height is the zero bias asymptotic barrier height. We have: 
 
 
 
The measured barrier height and ideality factor can then be extracted for each diode from the 
forward I-V measurements through a least square fit of eqn(14) in the linear region of the 
measurements. In order to determine the zero-field flat band barrier height, we have followed the 
analysis of Wagner et al.[1]. Following this method, we first define the flat band voltage by: 
 
 
 
Where, ND = n-type semiconductor donor density. Note that the barrier shift becomes zero at zero 
electric field. Then, according to Ref.[1], we can now define a modified flat-band zero electric 
field barrier height as: 
 
 
 
 
 
4. Simulation Procedure and results 
 
In our simulation we have used a silicon region which area is 0.01$um^2$ and a rectangular 
contact is used. Uniform doping is used throughout the silicon region. We have used Carrier 
statistics model (FERMI, BGN), Mobility model(CONMOB, FLDMOB) and Recombination 
model (SRH, AUGER) in our simulation. CONMOB - Concentration dependent model (Lookup 
table valid at 300K for Si and GaAs only. Uses simple power low temperature dependence). 
FLDMOB - Parallel electric field dependent model (Si and GaAs models. Required to model any 
type of velocity saturation effect).SRH - Schockley - Read - Hall model (Uses fixed minority 
carrier lifetimes). AUGER - Auger model (Direct transition of three carriers. Important at high 
current densities).FERMI - Fermi-Dirac model (Reduced carrier concentrations in heavily doped 
regions). BGN - Band gap narrowing model (Important in heavily doped regions).Several 
different numerical methods can be used for calculating the solutions to semiconductor device 
problems. Different combination of models will require ATLAS to solve up to six equations. For 
each of the model types there are basically three types of solution techniques: (a) Decoupled 
(GUMMEL) (b) Fully coupled (NEWTON) and (c) BLOCK. The GUMMEL method will solve 
for each unknown in turn keeping the other variables constant, repeating the process until a stable 
situation is achieved. The NEWTON method solve the total system of unknowns together. The 
BLOCK methods will solve some equations fully coupled, while others are de-coupled. The 
NEWTON method is useful when the system of equations is strongly coupled and has quadratic 
convergence. The NEWTON method may however spend extra time solving for quantities which 
are essentially constant or weakly coupled. NEWTON also requires a more accurate initial guess 
to the problem to obtain convergence. In our simulation we have used NEWTON method for 
314 
 
numerical solution. Figure 3 shows the NiSi structure after simulation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3: Ni-Si (n-type) Schottky diode structure 
 
The current-voltage (I-V) curve and the energy of Conduction band and Valence band is obtained 
by simulation as shown in figure 4 and 5 respectively. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4: Current-Voltage curve found by simulation 
 
315 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5: Conduction band and valence band energy 
 
4.1. Barrier height extraction from I-V curve 
 
For this particular schottky diode simulation we have used Atlas simulator of SilvacoTcad. We 
calibrated Atlas simulator to find different characteristics of schottky diode. Different parameters 
are used to obtain such a simulated data which conform to both experimental and theoretical 
results. A range of temperatures 30K-300K are used to illustrate the temperature dependence of 
barrier height and ideality factor. According to eqn(14), for V>3kT/q, the extrapolated current 
density, Js and the zero bias asymptotic barrier height can be obtained from the equation as: 
 
 
 
 
And the ideality factor is given by 
 
 
 
 
We have fitted our applied voltages and measured currents to eqn(14) via a least square fit in the 
linear region of the experimental data. Using an A** = 120 Amp/cm2.K2[2], the measured barrier 
height at zero bias can be calculated from eqn(18). The ideality factor can be evaluated from the 
slope of the I-V measurements according to eqn(19). In most cases, the linear region ranges from 
around 0.08-0.14 V. A typical I-V characteristics of one of the better working devices(i.e. low 
saturation current density and n close to unity) is shown in Fig.1. It has a saturation current 
density Js of around 2.00E-07A/cm2 at 300K. 
316 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6: The I-V characteristics of a typical NiSi (n-type) Schottky diode 
 
Using these measured barrier heights and the ideality factors of all the devices, we have 
determined the flat-band barrier height of 0.9304eV from eqn(16). The value of Ni and ND are 
estimated to be around 1.5×1010cm-3and 1×1020cm-3 [2] respectively. When we compare the 
measured and the calculated barrier height (see Table 1),we observed that the absolute difference 
is 0.089eV.We have compared our measured barrier heights with various published data[1,13,14] 
from different experimental measurements or analysis and it is found that the agreement is good. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 1: A summary of results from I-V measurements 
 
4.2. Temperature effect 
 
We have measured the Barrier Height of different temperature ranging from 30K - 300K keeping 
work function=5.15eV and carrier concentration = 1×1020cm-3. We found a satisfactory result 
from the simulation which is a similar phenomenon in most of the experimental results. We have 
found an increase of zero-bias Barrier Height but decrease of ideality factor n with increasing 
temperature as shown in Table-2. It is also observed that how reverse bias current varies with 
changing temperature as shown in Fig-8. 
 
Flat band BH 0.9304eV 
Simulated zero bias BH 0.8164eV 
Calculated zero bias BH 0.9050eV 
Difference in cal. & meas. BH  0.089eV 
317 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7: The curve showing the relation between temperature with barrier height and ideality 
factor. 
 
Table 2: The values of barrier height and ideality factors for different temperatures 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
T 30K 60K 90K 120K 150K 180K 210K 240K 270K 300K 
BH 0.149 0.305 0.459 0.6 0.71 0.77 0.796 0.812 0.816 0.818 
n 10.91 5.39 3.47 2.3 1.62 1.33 1.19 1.30 1.13 1.08 
318 
 
Figure 8: I-V Curves for temperatures ranges from 30K-300K 
 
It is easily understood how temperature affect the Barrier Height and ideality factor n from Fig- 7 
for a NiSi contact having a particular work function and doping density. 
 
4.3. Observation of tunneling efect 
 
To activate the tunneling effect in NiSi contact we used a higher doping(1×1020cm-3) in our 
simulation and significant tunneling effect in reverse bias is observed. We simulated the device 
with three different doping density (1×1012cm-3, 1×1015cm-3, 1×1020cm-3)(as shown in Fig-9) 
how the tunneling effect works at higher doping concentration. A range of voltage from 1.5 V to -
3 V was applied. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9: NiSi (n-type) I-V characteristics showing the tunneling effect obtained from simulation. 
 
From the above Figure-9 it is clearly understood that how reverse bias current of NiSi Schottky 
Diode increase significantly for the tunneling effect. We have compared our Result with an 
experimental result(Fig-10) [5] where a Circular NiSi contact having diameter 1.5mm is used. 
 
From the simulated and experimental data, similar behavior is observed. From both our simulated 
and experimental results it is clearly understood that at reverse bias current increases with 
increasing reverse bias voltage. 
For  lowly doped Si, Thermionic emission can be assumed as the dominant transport mechanism 
since the lowly doped n layer suppresses tunneling effects. For highly doped Si (i.e. n +Si), 
excess current is evident in the reverse bias. This current increases with doping concentration can 
be attributed either to the increase of Schottky Barrier(SB)image force lowering effect or to 
tunneling currents through the barrier. Generation - Recombination effects can be ruled out since 
they decrease with increasing doping concentration. In our simulation we emphasize the focus on 
only tunneling effect and we simulated the schottky diode considering the tunneling effect. 
Although a significant current increase could be caused by image force lowering, it is not enough 
to explain the excess currents for n +Si. The above considerations suggest tunneling as the 
dominant transport mechanism at electrodeposited Ni - n+ Si contacts. 
 
319 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10: Experimental J-V characteristics of electrodeposited NiSi contacts for nSi and n+Si 
 
5. Discussion 
 
SBDs these are fabricated from highly doped n-type silicon, we do expect a significant 
contribution from tunneling current. As a result in addition to forward bias current, a significant 
amount of current flows on reverse bias. Although we didn’t use exactly same parameters as 
experimental results to show the tunneling behavior but we tried to compare the behavior in 
general. For example, in our simulation we used rectangular contact whereas a circular contact is 
used in experimental procedure [5]. 
 
6. Conclusion  
 
In this work, the barrier height extraction from I-V curve and it’s relation with temperature is 
observed. It is observed that barrier height increases and ideality factor decreases with the 
increasing temperature. We have used the simple Wagner et al. [1] to derive the fundamental flat 
band barrier height of n-type NiSi SBD. Moreover, it has been shown that, tunneling effect has 
dominant effect on reverse bias current for highly doped Si. 
 
Acknowledgement 
 
We would like to thank our honorable teacher Dr.Muhammad Khaled Husain for giving his 
support and suggestions throughout our analysis and simulation process. 
 
320 
 
References 
 
Wagner, L.F., Young, R.W. and Sugerman, A.(1985) IEEE Device Lett. EDI-4, 320. 
Sze, S.M.(1981),Physics ofSemiconductorDevices,2nd Edn. Wiley, NewYork. 
Rhoderick,E.H.(1978),Metal-SemiconductorContacts,OxfordUniversityPress,London. 
Chin, V. W. L., Storey, W. V. and Green, M. A. (1988), P-Type   PtSi Schottky-Diode Barrier 
Height Determined from I-V Measurement. Solid State Electronics Vol.32,No. 6, pp. 475-
478. 
Kiziroglou, M.E., Li, X., Zhukov, A. A., deGroot, P. A.J. and deGroot, C.H.(2008),Thermionic 
field emission at electrodeposited Ni-Si Schottky barriers. Elsevier, pp. 1032-1038. 
Kiziroglou, ME, Zhukov, AA, Abdelsalam, M, Li, X, deGroot PAJ, Bartlett, PN, et al.  (2005).  
Electrodeposition of Ni-Si Schottky barriers, IEEE Trans Magn,41(10):2639-41. 
Werner, JH, Guttler, HH. (1991). Barrier inhomogeneities at schottky contacts. 
JApplPhys,69(3):1522-33. 
Kiziroglou, ME, Zhukov, AA, Li, X, Gonzalez, DC, deGroot, PAJ, Bartlett, PN, et al. 
(2006).Analysis of thermionic emission from electrodeposited Ni-Si Schottky barriers. 
Solid-state Commun, 140:508-13. 
Shannon, JM(1977).Thermionic-field emission through silicon Schottky barriers at room 
temperature. Solid-State Electron, 20:869-72. 
Schmidt, G, Molenkamp, LW. (2002)  Spin injection into semiconductors physics and 
experiments. Semicond Sci Techno l, 17:310-21. 
Jaffres, H,Fert, A(2002) Spin injection from a ferromagnetic metal into a semiconductor. 
JApplPhys, 91:8111-3. 
Schmidt, G(2005) Concepts for spin injection into semiconductors-
areview.JPhysDApplPhys,38:R107-22. 
Kurianski, J.M., Shanhan,S.T.,  Theden, U.,Green, M.A.,Storey, J.W. V.(1989)Solid-St. Electron, 
32,97. 
Kosonocky,W.F.,Elabd, H.(1983)Proc. SPIEIRD etectors, 433,167. 
Rideout, V.L.(1978)Thin SolidFilms,48,270. 
321 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
PHYSICAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITION AND PERFORMANCE RANKING 
OF MULTI-STORIED APARTMENTS HOUSING/COMPLEXES: CASE STUDY OF 
SOME SELECTED HOUSING PROJECTS IN DHAKA CITY 
 
 
Muhammad Salaha Uddin1, Mokhlesur Rahman2 and Farhadur Reza3  
 
 
ABSTRACT: Dhaka the capital city of Bangladesh possesses the availability of modern facilities 
for political, cultural and economic activities that attracts a large number of people. Increasing 
population requires more houses, shops, working places, educational institutions, adequate 
community and utility facilities. To meet their housing demand, private developers are playing a 
vital role. They are developing housing complexes within and at the periphery of the Dhaka city. 
These housing projects are not developed following proper planning standards and the overall 
community facilities and utility services are not satisfactory. This study was an endeavour to find 
out the competence of these private Multi-storied Apartments housing in Dhaka comparing to the 
Standard of Urban Development. For these purpose four private developers’ and one 
government’s housing projects have been studied in order to find out the facts and figures of 
competences of those housing projects. It is marked by the study that, Azimpur Government Staff 
Colony shows much better competence of planning standards and Mohammadia Housing Society 
hold the less. Japan Garden City lacks in community facilities but provides much better utility 
services. Except Azimpur Government Staff Colony all other housing complexes have deficiency 
in overall planning standards. The overall performances of the housing projects were drawn out 
combining computed rank of community services, utility services and space standards. It is 
evidenced that the performance of the housing project can be evaluated and measured based on 
community services, utility facilities and Planning standards. This paper illustrates the simple 
methodology of depicting the housing conditions and measuring the performances from different 
angles. The study was conducted based on primary and secondary data sources.  
 
Keywords:Urbanization, Migration, Housing Project, Multi-storied Apartments, Community 
services, Utility facilities, Planning Standards 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Some estimates showed that by 2030 the ratio of people living in cities globally will reach to 
61% developed and 80% in less developed countries (Khan, 2008). Bangladesh is the seventh 
                                                        
1Lecturer-Department of Urban & Regional Planning, Khulna University of Engineering &  
Technology, Khulna; Bangladesh  
2MSc Student of Urban Planning The University of HongKong;  
3Lecturer- Department of Urban & Regional Planning, Jahangirnagar University, Savar, Bangladesh 
322 
 
most populous country and is among the most densely populated countries in the world 
(Wikipedia, 2010). She is primarily a rural country where over 80% of the nation’s people live in 
rural areas. While only about one-fifth of Bangladesh’s population is urban the growth rate of 
urban population is fairly low (Rahman, 2004). Although still at a very low rate, the absolute 
urban population as well as the number of cities and towns in the country has increased manifold 
during the last few decades. Urban population has grown at an annual rate of about 4.6% since 
1981 while the annual growth rate of rural population is under 1.5%. On the other hand, 
population growth rate annually throughout the country is at just 2.0 % (BBS, 1991).  
 
Rural-Urban migration, natural increase of population and area expansion or boundary changes 
are the main reasons for rapid growth of urban population. It is appeared that, like many other 
places in the developing countries, the most important factor explaining the increasing share of 
urban population is rural-urban migration. Both pull factors especially employment opportunity, 
better livelihood etc. and push factors such as landlessness, stagnation of rural economy and 
vulnerability of natural disaster are important in stimulating the high rate of rural-urban migration. 
In the urbanization process of Bangladesh, Dhaka plays the most dominant role. Dhaka is the 
nerve centre of transportation networks and economic activities of the country. The economic 
varieties of the city trigger large scale migration towards it. It alone contains one-third of the 
urban population of Bangladesh. Due to augmentation of the urban population, necessity for more 
houses, shops, working places, educational institutions, adequate community and utility facilities 
etc. has been emerged. Dhaka has an annual requirement of 70,000 new housing units.  Demand 
for housing is rising at a rate of 10% per year (Daily Star, 2010). To respond the growing demand, 
private sector interventions have been appreciated. Although only 325 housing units were 
delivered by the real estate developers in 1985 but this number exceeds 1000 within next four 
years. Except the year 1992, a constant growth rate of the number of housing unit hand over has 
been evidenced. In the year 2009 a total of 8840 housing units have been delivered by the real 
estate developers (Sheltech, 2010).A real estate developer makes necessary improvements of 
some kind of real property, thereby increasing its value. Land developers typically acquire natural 
or unimproved land and improve it with utility connections, roads etc. On the other hand, 
building developers acquire raw land, improved land and redevelopable property in order to 
undertake building projects. 
 
Now, urban areas are expanding without any plan and encroaching agricultural lands, wetlands, 
forest resources and environmentally sensitive areas. Unplanned development within and outskirt 
of the cities are a common phenomenon. Urbanization and spatial inequalities are the main 
concern of the pedants in developing world. This has been beefed up by problems of rapid 
population growth, unplanned urban development. Recently in Dhaka city real estate developers 
are developing housing projects/complexes. They are not following prescribed proper rules and 
regulations and not providing necessary community facilities for the residents. Based on the 
overall situation this study was undertaken to find out the competence of those private Multi-
storied Apartment complexes in Dhaka in respect to the Standard Urban Development. 
 
2. Objectives of the Project 
 
 To scrutinize the existing condition of community facilities and utility services in studied 
housing projects. 
323 
 
 To find out the consistency of the studied multi-storied housing projects with planning 
standards i.e. built-up density, site density, net residential density/habitation density, green 
density, FAR and setback. 
 To draw out the combined rank and performance based on community services, utility 
facilities and planning standards.  
 
3. Research Methodology  
 
Careful considerations have been made to select appropriate methods, procedures and techniques 
for conducting this study. A comprehensive conceptual framework of the study was developed 
based on available relevant literatures/documents and discussions held with different stakeholders. 
The entire study was divided into five distinct categories of activities. They were resource 
mobilisation, designing of study methodology, implementation of the Study, data processing & 
analysis and report preparation. After employing necessary facilities and identifying appropriate 
indicators well structured questionnaire and checklist were developed to collect both qualitative 
and quantitative data with maximal reliability and validity. Qualified and experienced field 
investigators were involved in data collection through reconnaissance survey, direct respondents 
interview, physical observations/inspections and key informants interview. After data collection 
the necessary analysis was done using computer software. Five housing projects namely Japan 
Garden city, Lake City Concord, Rupayan Town, Mohammadia Housing Society and Azimpur 
Government Staff Quarter/Colony were selected for this purpose. The project selection was made 
carefully to get entire view of housing projects in Dhaka city (see figure :01)Figure. Then 
performance ranking has been made on the basis of community services, utility services and 
space standards. Ranking based on community services is measured by the ratio of allotted space 
for services and the allocated space in Private Residential Land Development Rule, 2004. Again 
performance ranking was made based on the existence of utility services and the satisfaction level 
of the respondents. Ranking based on space standards, weighted values are given from 1 to 5 as 
per standards competence of each housing complexes. Then performance ranking has been made 
as per total weighted values.   
 
 
4. Result and Analysis 
 
4.1 Family Income and Tenureship Pattern 
 
Family income level and the tenureship pattern are highly correlated in socio-economic analysis. 
Usually, high income level of a family indicates private ownership of a house. The following 
table states the correlation between tenureship pattern and family income level in the study areas. 
 
It has been observed that all of the respondents (100%) in the Azimpur Government Staff Colony 
and about 77.78% of the respondents in Japan Garden City are living in rented flat. On the other 
hand, in the Rupayan Town all of the respondents (100%) and about 76.47% respondents in 
Mohammadia Housing Society are living in their owned flat. All of the inhabitants in the 
Azimpur Government Staff Colony are government employees and living in a government staff 
quarter is the main reason of their living in the rented flat. In all housing complexes income of 
most of the family is between Tk 30,000 - Tk 50,000.  
 
324 
 
Table-1: Relationship between Tenureship Pattern and Family Income Level in the study areas 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Source: Field Survey , 2010 
 
4.2 Ranking of the Housing Complexes based on Community Services 
 
In this section a ranking of the housing complexes on the basis of community and utility services 
has been made. The following table states the ranking of the housing complexes on the basis of 
space allotted per person to the community services. 
 
 
325 
 
Table-2: Ranking Based on Community Services 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Source: Field survey, 2010 
 
Note: Value = allotted space (s.ft/person) ÷ standard space value(sq.ft/person)  
 
It is observed from the above table that, Azimpur Government Staff Colony possesses the highest 
value (111.39) followed by the Rupayan Town (3.38) and Lake City Concord. Performance of the 
Azimpur Government Staff Colony based on community services is better among the housing 
projects. The spaces allocated for community services in Azimpur Government Staff Colony 
maintain conformity with the standard space allocation for community services in Private 
Residential Land Development Rules, 2004. On the other hand, others housing project did not 
maintain the specified standards.  
 
There are two nursery schools, one college namely “Pioneer Degree College” and one Madrasa in 
Mohammadia Housing Society and one government school & college namely “Agrani School & 
College”, two private primary schools, one high school namely “Little Angels School” and 
“Raphan International School” in Azimpur staff colony. Mohammadia Housing Society has 
placed in the fifth position and Japan Garden City in the fourth position having values of 0.69 and 
0.96 respectively. There is no educational institution in Rupayan Town, Japan Garden City and 
Lake City Concord within their jurisdictions. For availing educational facilities they have to 
depend on the educational institutes located at surrounding areas.  
Overall healthcare facility of the housing complexes is not satisfactory because there is no clinic, 
dispensary or any other medical services for the inhabitants except one small clinic in 
Mohammadia Housing Society and some dispensaries in Azimpur Government Staff Colony. For 
availing healthcare facilities the inhabitants usually go to the nearest local hospitals/clinics or for 
better services they have to go renowned hospitals and clinics namely Dhaka Medical College 
Hospital, PG hospital etc. and other private clinics or hospitals. For social interaction there are 
one mosque and one playground but no community centre in the Lake City Concord. In Azimpur  
 
326 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 01: Location Map of the studied Housing Projects 
327 
 
Government Staff Colony for social interaction the residents usually go to the community centre, 
mosques, parks and other places like tea stall, some distinct meeting points and open space. There 
is no facilities for outdoor sports and as well as for indoor sports for the residents except one 
small children park in the Rupayan Town. There is no designated place for saying prayer in the 
Rupayan Town. Now, ground floor of a building is being used as mosque. In the Mohammadia 
Housing Society there is no park or play ground and specific space for the recreational purpose of 
the residents except a parcel of land for Youth Club in this housing complex. Children of this 
complex play in a vacant plot and most of the residents enjoy their leisure time by playing indoor 
games and gossiping with family members, friends and relatives. There are three mosques in 
Mohammadia Housing Society. For recreational purposes there is no provision of park, 
playground, community centre, green space in the Japan Garden City. The children face different 
difficulties while playing games on the paved streets. Although there is a Small Park in Lake City 
Concord, there is no supporting facility like playing instruments, sitting arrangement or paved 
walkway for the users. As a result, this park remains unutilized and the residents go far away 
from the housing complex for availing recreational facilities. 
 
The daily necessaries are available in the corner shops, kutcha bazaar and market in the Azimpur 
Government Staff Colony. There is a big kutcha bazaar in the southern part of the housing 
complex. New Super Market also very closes to the Azimpur Government Staff Colony. At 
present there is no provision of corner shop/kuthca bazaar/market in the Lake city, Concord. But 
a 16 storied building is being constructed where all kinds of shops, markets and banking facility 
will be accommodated. Although there is no commercial facility within the housing complex, 
various types of commercial facilities are available around the Japan Garden City. For meeting 
commercial needs of people a market is being constructed within the complex. According to the 
respondents, commercial facility in the Mohammadia Housing Society is satisfactory; as daily 
necessaries are widely available in a large kutcha bazaar located in the housing.  
 
4.3 Ranking of the Housing Complexes based on Utility Service 
 
A questionnaire survey was conducted about the existence and service level satisfaction of utility 
services among the residences of the studied housing projects. 200 dwellers were conducted from 
the five housing projects. Based on different factors of utility services the housing projects were 
ranked. In case of electricity supply the load shedding problem was considered. The respondents 
were asked about the severity of load shedding problem due to electricity shortage. The 
associated problems (metal stress, loss of productivity, security problem and others) of load 
shedding and severity were analyzed based on the respondents’ opinions. The severity was 
weighted from the percentage level of respondents’ opinion on associated problems and facilities 
of the respective utility services. For example in favour of low productivity due to load shedding 
the residents of Rupayan Town projects responding more positively (30%) than the residents of 
other housing projects. In this way the satisfaction levels of all utilities are weighted and ranked. 
For Water Supply the considered associated issues are: water quality, water quantity, frequency of 
water supply for ranking the projects based on water supply. Gas pressure during the winter 
season was considered to give the rank of the different housing projects. Frequency of garbage 
collection, air pollution, odor problems and water pollution were considered in case of garbage 
disposal facility. Adequate parking spaces and existence of fire fighting facilities were considered 
to prepare the ranking to the different housing projects. After analyzing the respondents 
percentage on different associated issues of utility services the rank was developed in a scale of 
328 
 
0-3. The following table shows the ranking of the housing complexes on the basis of the 
provision and performance of utility services. 
  
Table-3: Ranking Based on Utility Services 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
  Source: Field survey, 2010 
 
Note: Weighted vale based on existence of community services and satisfaction level of the 
respondents.   
 
0=doesn’t exist 
1= existence of community services 
2= existence and moderate satisfaction level 
3= existence and better satisfaction level 
 
It is evident from the above table that, the utility services of Japan Garden City is satisfactory as 
it possesses weighted value of 17. Rupayan Town and Lake City Concord hold the second 
position jointly in the ranking system securing weighted value of 15. Utility services in the 
Mohammadia Housing Society are inadequate among the housing complexes followed by 
Azimpur Government Staff Colony.  
   The electricity supply system is quite good in Japan garden City. The city authority has the 
provision of internal electricity generation during load shading. That’s why the residents do not 
face any problem due to cut of electricity. In the Lake city Concord there is provision of 
generator to produce electricity during load shading but the quantity of generator is inadequate. 
The Rupayan Town has internal electricity supply system through generator during load shading. 
But, the city dwellers are not satisfied with the facility because they can run only one bulb and 
one fan. In the Mohammadia Housing Society the frequency of load shading is 4 to 7 hour per 
day. There is no provision of generator or other internal power generation system within the 
housing society.  
   The quality and quantity of the water supplied in the Lake city Concord is satisfactory to the 
residents. Water supply both in terms of quality and quantity is satisfactory in Mohammadia 
Housing Society and Japan Garden City. Sometimes residents of the Azimpur Government Staff 
Colony get odorous water in the supply of WASA. During the peak hour the supply of water is 
normal. A few numbers of the residents suffer from skin diseases frequently. The Rupayan Town 
has own water supply system.  
 
Titas Gas Transmission and Distribution Company Ltd. is the responsible authority for supplying 
329 
 
gas in the Japan Garden City, Mohammadia Housing Society, Rupayan city, Lake City Concord 
and Azimpur Government Staff Colony. The pressure of gas is even and there is no evidence of 
accident results from gas supply. 
   On an average 2-3 kg waste generate per household of the study areas every day. In the 
Rupayan Town and Lake City, Concord garbage is collected daily. 90% of Japan Garden City, 
78.6% of Mohammadia Housing Society and 64.7% respondents of Azimpur Government Staff 
Colony have provision of daily garbage collection. 29.4% of Azimpur Government Staff Colony, 
10% of Japan Garden City and 7.1% respondents of Mohammadia Housing Society have 
provision of weekly garbage collection. 14.3% of Mohammadia Housing Society and 5.9% 
respondents of Azimpur Government Staff Colony have provision of monthly garbage collection.    
Ground floor of each building is being used as parking lot in the Rupayan Town, Lake City, 
Concord and Japan Garden city. There is also underground parking facility with each building in 
Japan Garden city. There is no difficulty for car parking in the Azimpur Government Staff Colony. 
For car parking there are 36 garages. Each of the garages has a dimension of 22 ft long and 12 ft 
wide. The buildings which are erected earlier in the Mohammadia Housing Society have no 
provision of parking space. But in some newly erected buildings parking facility has been 
provided in the ground floor. 
   80% respondents of the Lake City Concord and Mohammadia Housing Society have 
complained that they face parking difficulty due to inadequate parking space. Apart from this, 
20% respondents of the Mohammadia Housing Society have faced vehicle turning difficulty 
within their housing society. In Azimpur Government Staff Colony 50% of the respondents have 
mentioned other problem of parking difficulty which relates with the parking space that is located 
on the low land and during rainy season this area become inundated. The link road of such 
parking area is poor in physical condition. 
   There is no provision of fire fighting device in the buildings of Mohammadia Housing 
Society and Azimpur Government Staff Colony. The residents of these housing complexes are 
vulnerable to fire hazard. In the Japan Garden city, Lake City Concord and Rupayan Town there 
are fire extinguisher, fire stare and fire hydrant. These devices are well visible to the residents and 
they feel secure in the housing complex. 
 
4.4  Ranking of the Housing Complexes based on Planning Standards 
 
Here housing complexes are ranked on the basis of built-up density, habitation density, site 
density, floor area ratio (FAR) and green density. The highest rank value represents the better 
space standards. It has been appeared from the table-4 that, Azimpur Government Staff Colony 
possessed rank 1 in the ranking system securing total weighted value of 24 followed by Japan 
Garden City (17) and Rupayan Town (16). Lake City Concord is in the fifth position in terms of 
planning standards followed by the Mohammadia Housing Society. In the Azimpur Government 
Staff Colony planning standards are maintained strictly according to Private Residential Land 
Development Rules, 2004 compared to other housing projects.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
330 
 
Table-4: Ranking of the Housing Complexes based on Planning Standards 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      Source: Field survey, 2010,  Note: * weighted value 
 
4.5 Integrated Ranking of the Housing Complexes 
 
On the basis of community services, utility services and planning standards an integrated ranking 
of the housing complexes has been framed out. Now the final ranking of the housing complexes 
is made with the combination of the above mentioned three categories of ranking. 
 
Table-5: Integrated Ranking of the Housing Complexes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
       Source: Compiled from field survey, 2010 
 
It is observed from the above table that, Azimpur Government Staff Colony possess at the first 
position of the rank with the lowest average rank value (1.67). The community services and 
planning standards in this housing complex is fare enough though utility services are not 
adequate in Azimpur Government Staff Colony. Utility services in Japan Garden City are quite 
better but it shows less competence in terms of community services and planning standards and 
thereby holds the second position in the ranking system. In Rupayan Town the community and 
utility services are better but this is less competence in planning standards and thus placed in 
second position jointly with Japan Garden City. The utility services of Lake City Concord are 
better but the community services and planning standards of this city are poor and thereby it 
holds third position in the ranking system. The community services, utility services and the 
planning standards of the Mohammadia Housing Society is the poorest among the study areas. 
That is why Mohammadia Housing Society is at the last position in the ranking system.     
331 
 
5. Concluding Remarks 
 
There is no educational institution, healthcare facility, commercial facility etc. in the complexes 
except Azimpur Government Staff Colony and Mohammadia Housing Society. The condition of 
various utility facilities is not satisfactory. Total developed area of Lake City Concord and 
Mohammadia Housing Society is 72% and 82.33% respectively that did not follow the standard. 
Habitation density or net density (dwelling unit/acre) of Japan Garden City and Rupayan Town is 
greater than other areas. The site density of Japan Garden City (about 1234), Lake City Concord 
(about 504) and Mohammadia Housing Society (about 560) is more than the prescribed standard. 
FAR is too high in Lake City Concord (about 11.52) and Japan Garden City (about 6.88) 
compared to other study areas. The space in between buildings in Japan Garden City and 
Azimpur Staff colony is enough to pass light and air compared to Lake City Concord, 
Mohammadia Housing Society and Rupayan Town. Although there is enough space in between 
buildings in Japan Garden City, it seems very congested due to the height of the buildings. The 
width of Primary Road, Secondary road and Access Road in all studied complexes/cities is more 
or less consistent with the standard stated in Dhaka Imarat Nirman Bidhimala-2008.  
 
From the above explanation it is clear that the functionality performance of different housing 
project differs according to the specific components. If we focus only to community services, 
planning standards or to utility services we get different results for different housing projects. 
Instead of considering the different components separately it is logical to consider the 
performance of the housing project integrating the all planning components. To judge the 
functionality of any developed housing complexes it is logical to develop an integrated 
functionality schemes.  
 
In the conclusion, it could be said that every private residential land development project should 
ensure provision of community facilities (education, health, community center/mosque, 
recreational zone, roads), utility facilities, etc. as per the private residential land development 
rules-2004 within the project site for the welfare of the inhabitants. Master plan, Built-up density, 
Habitation density, site density, FAR, Green density should be consistent with the standards. 
Keeping conformity with the standard enough space should be kept surrounding the buildings.  
 
References 
Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics (BBS), Bangladesh Population Census, 1991 
Daily Star, 2010, “Why Small Flats Are Sky High”, Sayeda Akter, The Daily Star, 26-12-2010, 
pp-B8.   
Dhaka Mahanagar Imarat Nirman Bidhimala, 2008. 
Khan, Haider (2008). “Challenges for Sustainable Development: Rapid Urbanization, Poverty 
and Capabilities in Bangladesh.” MPRA Paper No. 9290 posted 24. June 2008 / 11:21. 
Rahman, M. Mizanur (2004). “Regionalization of Urbanization and Spatial Development: 
Planning Regions in Bangladesh.” The Journal of Geo-Environment, Vol. 4, PP. 31-46. 
http://en.wikipedia.org, Accessed date: 28-08-2010 
http://www.jgclbd.com/faci.html, Accessed Date: 15-06-2010 
http://www.propertykhazana.com/Microsite/microsite.php?no=461, Accessed Date: 15-06-2010 
http://www.advanced-bd.com/angel-snsp-shot.php, Accessed Date: 17-06-2010 
http://www.concordgroup.net/lake_city_project.html, Accessed Date: 17-06-2010 
Sheltech, (2010), “Annual Report”, Sheltech Pvt Ltd 
332 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
A COMPARATIVE STUDY OF BIODIESEL PRODUCTION FROM DIFFERENT RAW 
MATERIALS 
 
 
Kaniz Ferdous1, Anjan Deb2, Jannatul Ferdous2, M. Rakib Uddin3, Maksudur R. Khan4,5 and 
M. A. Islam5 
 
 
ABSTRACT: In this paper a comparative study was done for biodiesel production from two 
different source e.g. Pithraj oil (Aphanamixis Polystachya) and Nahor oil (Mesua ferrea).  Both 
seeds were collected from local area of Sylhet region.  Oil was extracted from the seed by press 
method. Various properties of the raw oil such as specific gravity, free fatty acid (FFA), 
viscosity, saponification value were measured by standard methods. Usually biodiesel was 
prepared from oil by base or acid catalyzed transesterification method. Purified oil is required for 
base catalyzed transesterification i.e oil must contain less than 2 wt% FFA. For higher FFA 
containing oil acid catalyzed transesterification method is employed. But acid catalyzed 
transesterification requires much time to get desired conversion. Since, Pithraj oil contains 7.5 
wt% FFA and Nahor oil contains 12.4 wt% FFA so, Biodiesel was prepared from both oil by 
two-step methods. In two-step methods, the first step is acid catalyzed esterification followed by 
base catalyzed transesterification. The reaction parameters for esterification and 
transesterification were optimized. The various properties of produced biodiesel from both oil 
were measured and compared with each other and with standard diesel and biodiesel properties. 
 
Keywords: Pithraj oil; Nahor oil; Free Fatty Acid; Esterification; Transesterification; Biodiesel. 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Presently the world’s energy needs are met through non-renewable resources such as 
petrochemicals, natural gas and coal. Since the demand and cost of petroleum based fuel is 
growing rapidly, and if the present pattern of consumption continues, these resources will be 
depleted in few years. Hence, efforts are being made to explore for alternative source of energy. 
                                                        
1Corresponding Author, Ph.D student, Shahjalal University of Science and Technology, Sylhet, 
Bangladesh. engr_kaniz@yahoo.com. 
2Student, Department of Chemical Engineering and Polymer Science; SUST, Sylhet, Bangladesh. 
anjan_cep@yahoo.com, rumkyjannat@yahoo.com. 
3Lecturer, Department of Chemical Engineering and Polymer Science; SUST, Sylhet, Bangladesh. 
mruddincep@gmail.com. 
4  Associate Professor, Faculty of Chemical and Natural Resources Engineering, University Malaysia 
Pahang, 26300 Gambang, Kuantan, Pahang, Malaysia. mrkhancep@yahoo.com. 
5 Professor, Department of Chemical Engineering and Polymer Science; SUST, Sylhet, Bangladesh. 
islamsust@yahoo.com 
333 
 
An alternative fuel must be technically feasible, economically competitive, environmentally 
acceptable and readily available (Srivastava and Prasad, 2000). 
   Vegetable oils (VOs) have attracted attention as an alternative for petroleum based fuel 
(Noureddini et al., 2005). Due to high viscosity and low volatility, its long term use posed 
different problems such as deposition, ring sticking and injector choking in engine (Muniyappa et 
al., 1996). Hence, improvement in the vegetable oil was foreseen to improve the quality of the 
fuel. To lower the viscosity of vegetable oil, chemical and thermal processes were tried to make 
vegetable oil compatible with CI (Compression Ignition) engines. The well-known thermal 
process, pyrolysis, resulted in production of low value materials and sometimes resulted in more 
production of gasoline instead of diesel. Other processes, i.e. blending and micro-emulsification 
of vegetable oils reduced the viscosity but still posed few problems. These problems were namely 
carbon deposition and lubricating oil contamination. Hence, the most suitable process for 
reducing the viscosity found was the chemical process, transesterification, where triglycerides 
from vegetable oils react with a lower alcohol to produce fatty acid alkyl esters possessing 
properties similar to mineral diesel (Ma and Hanna, 1999). 
   Biodiesel is a non-toxic, biodegradable, renewable fuel that can be produced from a range of 
rganic feedstock including fresh or waste vegetable oils, animal fats, and oilseed plants. Biodiesel 
has significantly lower emissions than petroleum-based diesel when it is burned, whether used in 
its pure form or blended with petroleum diesel. It does not contribute to a net rise in the level of 
carbon dioxide in the atmosphere and leads to minimize the intensity of greenhouse effect 
(Vicente et al., 2004 and Antolin et al., 2002). 
   The edible oils such as soybean oil in USA, rapeseed oil in Europe and palm oil in countries 
with tropical climate such as Malaysia are being used for the production of biodiesel to fuel their 
compression ignition engines (Knothe, 2002). In Bangladesh, the use of edible oils for engine 
fuel is not feasible since the potentiality of edible oil sources is below the annual demand (Kaul 
and Das, 2011); however, there are several non-edible oilseed species such as Nahor (Mesua 
ferrea.), Pitraj (Aphanamixis Polystachya), Castor (Ricinus Communis L.), Karanja (Pongamia 
pinnata), Jatropha (Jatropha curcas), Neem (Azadirachta indica), Mahua (Madhuca indica), 
Simarouba (Simarouba indica) etc., which could be utilized as a source for production of oil. 
Among these, pitraj and nahor are the oil seed bearing tree, which is non-edible and does not find 
any suitable application in our country. These seeds can be a potential source for biodiesel 
production in our country.    
   Base catalyzed transesterification reaction is widely used for biodiesel production from 
vegetable oil due to its faster kinetics than that of acid catalyzed process. But if FFA content in 
the oil is more than 2%, the base catalyzed process is not feasible. The main problem for the non-
edible oil sources is its high FFA content which limits the use of single step transesterification 
reaction. To overcome this problem, two-step procedures were used to prepare biodiesel from 
different oils, which have high content of free fatty acids (Y. Wang et al., 2007); L.C. Meher et. 
al., 2008). In these works the first step is the acid catalyzed esterification, which reduces the FFA 
content of the oil and minimizes the soap formation in the second step (base catalyzed 
transesterification). Since the FFA content of raw pithraj and nahor oil was higher, a two-step 
method was studied for the preparation of biodiesel. Various reaction parameters for 
esterification and transesterification reaction were optimized and compared with one another. 
Finally various properties of the produced biodiesel were measured and compared with one 
another and with biodiesel and petro-diesel standard.  
 
 
334 
 
2. Materials and Methods 
 
2.1 Chemicals 
 
Methanol (99-100%), ethanol (99-100%), sodium hydroxide pellets (96%), potassium hydroxide 
pellets (>84%), phenolphthalein (pH 8.2 - 9.8), starch, acetone (99%), n-Hexane(96%), 
hydrochloric acid (37%), isopropanol, iodine, sodium iodide, glacial acetic acid, bromine, carbon 
tetrachloride etc. were purchased from Merck, Germany. All the chemicals used were analytical 
reagent grade. 
 
2.2 Extraction of oil 
 
Both pithraj and nahor seeds were collected from road side of Sylhet region. Oil from the seed 
was extracted by mechanical press method. Mechanical press is vertical, manual operated, 
cylindrical (4.3 cm ID) which have a spiral screw that convey the mass from the hopper 
to pressure raising area. Slow and continuous rotation of the mechanical press allows 
raising sufficient pressure for the extraction of oil. Here the spiral screw is used for 
random mixing, size distribution and passing the mass from hopper to pressure raising 
area. Oil drainage nozzles are located at the face of the expeller. Pressure raising area is 
located at the face of the expeller. In this expeller, pressure rises in slow and continuous 
rotation. The faster rotation of the expeller causes the back flow of the solid seed meal 
and it results the lowering of pressure. The input of seed grain should be controlled to 
prevent the loss of the seed because if the amount of raw seed is high, the extra seed meal 
stays within the screw and it is unable to reach in the pressure raising area. The back flow 
of seed grain should be adjusted with the rotation of the spiral screw. After oil extraction it 
was filtered. The oil was stored at room temperature. 
 
2.3 Preparation of biodiesel 
 
In the current study biodiesel was prepared from pithraj and nahor oil by two step method. A 
two-step method, acid catalyzed esterification followed by base catalyzed transesterification, of 
higher FFA containing oil (castor oil) was adopted for the complete conversion of FFA and TG to 
fatty acid methyl esters. The first step (esterification) was carried out at 70 0C and atmospheric 
pressure. The molar ratio of methanol/FFA was 6/1 for pithraj oil and 5/1 for nahor oil. Typically, 
100 ml oil was taken in a three-necked 500 ml round bottomed flask equipped with a reflux 
condenser. The flask was placed on an electric heater with a temperature controller and magnetic 
stirrer. Sulfuric acid (5 wt% of oil) was mixed with required amount of methanol and transferred 
into the reaction medium. The reaction continued until the FFA of oil reduces below 2%. The 
reaction time was optimized. After that the reaction contents were cooled to room temperature 
and reaction product was washed with hot water until clear water found. The organic phase was 
collected and dried under vacuum at 100 0C for 30 min. The dried sample (50 ml) was put into a 
three-necked 500 ml. round bottomed flask, equipped with a reflux condenser, for base catalyzed 
transesterification. Sodium hydroxide pellets (1 wt% of oil) were mixed with required amount of 
methanol. Molar ratio of methanol to oil was taken 6:1 for the total conversion of TG to 
biodiesel. The flask was placed on an electric heater with a temperature controller and magnetic 
stirrer. The transesterification reaction was performed under vigorous stirring at 600C. After a 
certain period reaction was stopped by adding stoichiometric amount of HCl.  The reaction time 
335 
 
for transesterification reaction was optimized. Then contents were cooled to room temperature, 
and reaction product was washed with hot water until clear water found. The organic phase 
(biodiesel) was collected and dried under vacuum at 100 0C for half an hour. Finally the various 
properties of the biodiesel were measured. 
 
2.4 Analytical methods for oil and biodiesel 
 
2.4.1 Determination of FFA content 
 
FFA content of both oil and biodiesel was measured by the method described by Jeffery et al. 
(1991). At first 0.1 N sodium hydroxide solution was prepared by dissolving required amount of 
NaOH in 100 ml distilled water. 1 ml of sample was taken in a small conical flux and weighted 
accurately. Then 10 ml pure isopropyl alcohol was added. Then the conical flask was warmed 
gently by standing it in some hot water, stirring is conducted until all the oil is dissolved in the 
alcohol and turns clear. Two drops of phenolphthalein solution was added in the mixture. Finally 
this solution was titrated by 0.1 N sodium hydroxide solution until pink color appeared. 
 
2.4.2 Determination of viscosity 
 
Viscosity was determined by standard ASTM D445. For measuring the viscosity an Ostwald 
viscometer was used. The calibration constant was determined by using a solvent of known 
kinematic viscosity. The time was measured for a fixed volume of liquid to flow under gravity 
through the capillary of a calibrated viscometer under reproducible driving head and at a closely 
controlled and known temperature. The kinematic viscosity is then equal to the product of this 
time and a calibration constant for the tube. 
 
2.4.3 Determination of saponification value 
 
Saponification value (SV) was determined by standard method (Jeffery et. al., 1991). Typically, 1 
g sample was taken with 25 mL alcoholic 0.5M KOH solution, heated for 1 h in a steam bath 
with occasional shaking and titrated the excess KOH with the 0.5 M hydrochloric acid solution. 
 
2.4.4 Determination of Iodine value 
 
The iodine value (IV) was determined by the method described in American Oil Chemist’s 
Society (1998). To determine IV, the mixture of tested fuel and chemical reagents were titrated 
against 0.01N sodium thiosulfate solution until the disappearance of the blue color. IV was 
calculated by the following Eq.1: 
 
 
 
Where, S and B are the amounts (in unit of mL) of sodium thiosulfate solution required for 
titration of the tested sample and blank sample respectively. N is the molar concentration (in unit 
of mol/L) of sodium thiosulfate solution and W is the weight (in unit of gm) of the tested sample. 
   Other physical properties such as moisture content, density and calorific value of the oil were 
determined by following ASTM D 1744 (Karl Fisher method), ASTM D 1480/81 and ASTM D 
336 
 
240 respectively. Flash point, pour point and cloud point were determined by standards ASTM D 
93 (Pensky–Martens Flashpoint Apparatus, Lazer Scientific Inc., Germany), ASTM D 2500 and 
ASTM D 97 respectively. 
 
 
3. Result and discussion 
 
3.1 Characterization of oil 
 
Physical properties of the oil, pithraj and nahor, were measured by standard method and 
presented in Table 1. 
 
Table 1 Physical properties of raw oil 
 
Property name Pithraj oil Nahor oil 
Color Dark green Brown 
Specific gravity 0.92 0.93 
Viscosity at 25°C (mm2/sec) 53.7 58.06 
% FFA 7.5 12.4 
Saponification value 233.4 249.33 
Oil content (wt/wt) 33.3 52.4 
 
 
3.2 Preparation of biodiesel 
 
Biodiesel was prepared from higher FFA containing pithraj and nahor oil by two-step methods. 
Steps are acid catalyzed esterification followed by base catalyzed transesterification. 
 
3.2.1 First step-Esterification 
 
Four reaction parameters that affect the esterification reaction are oil to methanol molar ratio, 
catalyst concentration, reaction temperature and time. All the reaction parameters were optimized 
and the results are discussed below. 
 
3.2.1.1 Effect of molar ratio of oil to methanol 
 
The alcohol to oil molar ratio is one of the important factors that affect the conversion of 
esterification reaction. Since esterification is a reversible reaction higher molar ratio of alcohol 
results in a greater ester conversion in a shorter time. The esterification reaction was studied at oil 
to methanol molar ratio of 1:3 and 1:6 for Pithraj oil and for Nahor oil the reaction was studied at 
oil to methanol molar ratios of 1:3 and 1:5. The results are represented in Figure 1.  From Figure 
1 it is observed at a molar ratio of 1:3 the maximum reduction in FFA was 2.3% from 7.5% 
within 3 hours whereas at 1:6 molar ratios it was reduced to 1.6% within 1.5 hours for Pithraj oil. 
The reduction of FFA below 2% occurs within 1 hour at the oil to methanol molar ratio of 1:6. 
 
337 
 
 
 
Figure 1 Effect of oil to methanol molar ratio in the esterification reaction. [Catalyst conc. = 
5wt% of oil; reaction temperature = 70°C] 
 
For Nahor oil at 1:3 molar ratios the maximum reduction in FFA was 2.2% from 12.4% within 3 
hours whereas at 1:6 molar ratios it was reduced to 1.55% within 2 hours. The reduction of FFA 
below 2% occurs within 1.5 hour at the oil to methanol molar ratio of 1:5. The reaction was 
carried out at a catalyst (H2SO4) concentration of 5 wt% of oil and a temperature of 70°C for both 
oils.  
 
 
 
Figure 2 Effect of catalyst concentration on esterification reaction. [Oil: methanol = 1:6 &1:5 for 
Pithraj oil & Nahor oil respectively; Temperature = 70°C] 
 
338 
 
3.2.1.2 Effect of catalyst concentration 
 
Esterification reaction was carried out at three different catalyst concentrations for both oil and 
the results are represented in the Figure 2. Sulfuric acid was used as catalyst for both oils. From 
Figure 2 it was observed that rate of the reaction increases as the concentration of catalyst 
increased. With a higher concentration of catalyst it requires less time to reach the reaction in 
equilibrium. It requires 1 hr for the reduction of FFA below 2% for pithraj oil and 1.5 hr for 
nahor oil when the concentration of catalyst was 5wt% of oil. Reactions were conducted at oil to 
methanol molar ratio of 1:6 for pithraj oil and 1:5 for nahor oil with a temperature of 70°C. 
 
3.2.1.3 Effect of temperature 
 
Temperature is an important parameter that affects the esterification. There is an increase in the 
rate of reaction with the increase in temperature. The reaction was carried out at five different 
temperatures with 1:6 oil to methanol molar ratio for pithraj oil and 1:5 for nahor oil at a catalyst 
concentration of 5 wt% of oil. The results are represented in the figure 3. From figure 3 it was 
observed that the maximum reduction of FFA occurs at a temperature of 70°C which was 
considered as our optimum temperature for esterification reaction. 
 
3.2.2 Second step-transesterification 
After the first step (acid catalyzed esterification) the FFA of the pithraj oil reduces from 
7.5% to 1.6% and for nahor oil it was 1.55% from 12.4% but the change in viscosity was 
little. To reduce the viscosity the product of esterification was subjected to base catalyzed 
transesterification reaction.  
 
 
 
Figure 3 Effect of temperature on esterification reaction. [Oil: methanol = 1:6 &1:5 for pithraj oil 
& Nahor oil respectively; Catalyst (H2SO4) conc. = 5wt% of oil] 
339 
 
Various reaction parameters such as oil to methanol molar ratio, effect of temperature, 
effect of catalyst concentration and reaction time was observed. The results are 
represented in the following figures. 
 
3.2.2.1 Effect of methanol molar ratio 
 
The methanol to oil molar ratio is one of the important factors that affect the transesterification 
reaction. The transesterification reaction was studied at oil to methanol molar ratio of 1:3 and 1:6 
for Pithraj oil and Nahor oil. The results are represented in Figure 4. From Figure 4 it is observed 
at a molar ratio of 1:3 the maximum reduction in viscosity was 7.2 mm2/sec from 35.7 mm2/sec 
within 1 hour whereas at 1:6 molar ratios it was reduced to 5.0 mm2/sec for Pithraj oil. For Nahor 
oil at 1:3 molar ratios the maximum reduction in viscosity was 10.4 mm2/sec from 38.3 mm2/sec 
within 1 hour whereas at 1:6 molar ratios it was reduced to 6.8 mm2/sec. The reaction was carried 
out at a catalyst (NaOH) concentration of 1 wt% of oil and a temperature of 60°C for both oils. 
 
3.2.2.2 Effect of catalyst concentration 
 
Transesterification reaction was carried out at two different catalyst concentrations for both oil 
and the results are represented in the Figure 5. Sodium hydroxide was used as catalyst for both 
oils. From Figure 5 it was observed that rate of the reaction increases as the concentration of 
catalyst increased, as a result the viscosity of the oil was decreased. With a higher concentration 
of catalyst FFA reacts with sodium hydroxide and produce soap. This soap again converts to FFA 
 
 
 
Figure 4 Effect of oil to methanol molar ratio in the transesterification reaction. [Catalyst conc. = 
1wt% of oil; reaction temperature = 60°C] 
 
340 
 
 
 
Figure 5 Effect of catalyst concentration on transesterification reaction. [Oil: Methanol = 1:6, 
Temperature = 60°C] 
 
during acid wash of biodiesel, which results a slight increase in viscosity. But, the catalyst 
concentration less than 0.5 wt% for pithraj oil and 0.75 wt% for nahor oil was not effective for 
transesterification reaction. Thus for transesterification reaction the optimum concentration of 
catalyst (NaOH) was 0.5 wt% and 0.75 wt% for pithraj and nahor oil respectively. With a higher 
concentration of catalyst it requires less time to reach the reaction in equilibrium. Reactions were 
conducted at oil to methanol molar ratio of 1:6 for pithraj and nahor oil with a temperature of 
60°C. 
 
3.2.2.3 Effect of temperature 
 
Temperature is also an important factor that affects the transesterification reaction. There is an 
increase in the rate of reaction with the increase in temperature. The reaction was carried out at 
four different temperatures with 1:6 oil to methanol molar ratio for pithraj oil and nahor oil at a 
catalyst concentration of 0.5 wt% for pithraj oil and 0.75 wt% of oil for nahor oil. The results are 
represented in the figure 6. From figure 6 it was observed that the maximum reduction in 
viscosity occurs at a temperature of 60°C which was considered as optimum temperature for 
transesterification reaction. 
 
3.3 Characterization of biodiesel 
 
Various properties of biodiesel produced from pithraj and nahor oil were measured using 
standard methods and compared with biodiesel standard and petro-diesel. The results are 
represented in table 2. 
 
341 
 
 
 
Figure 6  Effect of temperature on transesterification reaction. [Oil: Methanol = 1:6; catalyst 
conc. =0.5 wt%  and 0.75 wt% of oil for pithraj and nahor oil respectively; Reaction 
time = 1hour] 
 
Table 2 Properties of final biodiesel 
 
Properties Pithraj oil methyl ester 
Nahor oil 
methyl ester 
Biodiesel 
standard 
[Leung et al., 
2010 and Joshi 
and Pegg, 
2007] 
Diesel standard 
[Joshi and 
Pegg, 2007] 
Color Reddish  Black  - - 
Specific gravity at 250C 0.88 0.89 0.88 (at 15.5°C) 
0.85 (at 
15.5°C) 
Viscosity mm2/s at 250C 4.2 6.1 1.9 - 6.0 1.3 - 4.1 
FFA Weight% 0.82 0.7 Trace - 
Saponification value 
(mg of KOH/gm of oil) 212.3 204.7 - - 
Iodiene value 74.5 81.3 - - 
Cetane Index 55.3 54.7 - - 
Calorific Value(Mj/Kg) 36.2 35.5 37.5 42 
Flash point (0C) 150 160 100 to 170 60 to 80 
342 
 
Cloud point (0C) 3 6 -3 to 12 -15 to 5 
Pour point (0C) 0 3 -15 to 10 -35 to -15 
 
 
4. Conclusion 
 
Biodiesel was prepared from pithraj and nahor oil by two-step method. In the first step (acid 
catalyzed esterification) the reduction of FFA occurs to the desired content but the viscosity of 
the oil does not reduce to the desired level. That’s why a second step (base catalyzed 
transesterification) requires for the reduction of viscosity. Reaction parameters for esterification 
and transesterification reaction were optimized. Two different oils showed the different results. 
The optimum parameters are listed in the Table 3. It can be concluding that both oil, pithraj and 
nahor oil, are very much suitable for biodiesel production in our country and it can contribute to 
meet the energy demand. 
 
Table 3 Optimum parameters for two-step method 
 
Reaction Oil  Oil: Methanol Catalyst conc. Temperature Time 
Pithraj 1:6 5 wt% 70°C 1hr Esterification Nahor 1:5 5 wt% 70°C 1.5 hr 
Pithraj 1:6 0.5 wt% 60°C 1hr Transesterification Nahor 1:6 0.75 wt% 60°C 1hr 
 
 
References  
 
Antolin G, Tinaut F, Briceno Y, Castano V, Perez C, Ramirez A. ``Optimization of biodiesel 
production by sunflower oil transesterification’’. Bioresource Technology; 2002; 83; 111–4. 
Jeffery, G.H., Bassett, J., Mendham, J., Denney, R.C., Vogel’s Textbook of Quantitative 
Chemical Analysis (1991), 5th ed., Longman Scientific and Technical, UK, pp. 308-309. 
Joshi, R.M.  and Pegg, M.J., (2007), Flow properties of biodiesel fuel blends at low temperatures, 
Fuel, 86, pp. 143-151. 
Kaul A.K., Das M.L. (2011), Promoting the conservation and use of underutilized and neglected 
crops, Ministry of Agriculture, Dhaka. 
Knothe, G., 2002. Curr. Perspect. Biodiesel Inform. 13, 900–903. 
Leung D.Y.C, Xuan Wu and Leung M.K.H., (2010), A review on biodiesel production using 
catalyzed transesterification, Applied Energy, 87, pp. 1083-1095. 
Ma F, Hanna MA. Biodiesel production: a review. Bioresource Technology 1999;70:1–15. 
Muniyappa PR, Brammer SC, Noureddini H. Improved conversion of plant oils and animal fats 
into biodiesel and co-product. Bioresource Technology 1996;56:19–24. 
Naik M., Meher L.C., Naik S.N., Das L.M., Production of biodiesel from high free fatty acid 
Karanja (Pongamia pinnata) oil, Biomass and Bioenergy 32 (2008) 354–357. 
Noureddini H., Gao X., Philkana R.S., ``Immobilized Pseudornona cepacia lipase for biodiesel 
fuel production from soybean oil’’; Bioresource Technology 96 (2005) 769-777. 
343 
 
Official Methods and Recommended Practices of the American Oil Chemists Society, (1998), 5th 
ed. Champaign: AOCS Press. 
Srivastava, A., Prasad, R., 2000. Triglycerides-based diesel fuels. Renew. Sust. Energ. Rev. 4 (2), 
111–133. 
Vicente G, Martinez M, Aracil J. ``Integrated biodiesel production: a comparison of different 
homogeneous catalyst systems.’’;  Bioresource Technology. 2004; 92; 297–305. 
Wang Y., Ou S., Liu P., Zhang Z., Preparation of biodiesel fromwaste cooking oil via two-step 
catalyzed process, Energy Conversion and Management 48 (2007) 184–188. 
344 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
DEVELOPMENT OF THREE STEP METHOD FOR BIODIESEL PRODUCTION 
FROM WASTE COOK OIL BY LOW COST  
 
 
Kaniz Ferdous1, Md. Rahim Uddin2, Rehnuma Islam3, M. Rakib Uddin4 Maksudur R. Khan5, and 
M. A. Islam6 
 
 
ABSTRACT: In this paper, low cost three step method for biodiesel preparation from waste 
cook oil (WCO) was studied. WCO was collected from local restaurant of sylhet city. The 
properties of WCO were measured by standard methods. The raw oil contains 1.9 wt% free fatty 
acid (FFA) and its viscosity was 47.6 mm2/s.  Biodiesel was prepared from WCO by three step 
method where, the first step was saponification followed by acidification to produce FFA and 
finally esterification of FFA to produce biodiesel. Saponification of WCO was done by aqueous 
calcium oxide (CaO), acidification was done by hydrochloric acid and esterification was done by 
methanol in presence of acid catalyst. To reduce the biodiesel production cost, all of the reagents 
used were commercial grade except catalyst. The biodiesel yield by three step method was 73.5% 
(wt/wt).  At optimum conditions the FFA was reduced to 1.5 wt% and prolonged reaction time 
could not reduce the FFA to the desired level. In order to eliminate the problem, the esterification 
reaction was carried out in presence of silica gel. It was found that the presence of silica gel 
increased the rate of reaction and the final FFA content is also reduced to 0.5 wt%. The biodiesel 
properties were measured by standard methods and compared with the standard biodiesel and 
petro-diesel properties.      
 
Keywords: Calcium oxide, Saponification, Acidification, Esterification, Biodiesel. 
 
 
 
                                                        
1Ph.D student, Department of Chemical Engineering and Polymer Science, Shahjalal University of Science 
and Technology, Sylhet, Banhladesh. engr_kaniz@yahoo.com 
2 Student, Department of Chemical Engineering and Polymer Science, Shahjalal University of Science and 
Technology, Sylhet, Banhladesh. rahimuddin.cep@gmail.com 
3 Student, Department of Chemical Engineering and Polymer Science, Shahjalal University of Science and 
Technology, Sylhet, Banhladesh. farjana.afrin.32@gmail.com 
4Lecturer, Department of Chemical Engineering and Polymer Science, Shahjalal University of Science and 
Technology, Sylhet, Banhladesh. mruddincep@gmail.com 
5Professor, Department of Chemical Engineering and Polymer Science, Shahjalal University of Science 
and Technology, Sylhet, Bangladesh and Associate Professor, Faculty of Chemical and Natural Resources, 
University Malaysia Pahang, 26300 Gambang, Kuantan, Pahang, Malaysia. mrkhancep@yahoo.com  
6 Professor, Department of Chemical Engineering and Polymer Science, Shahjalal University of Science 
and Technology, Sylhet, Bangladesh. islamsust@yahoo.com 
345 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Biodiesel is a nonpetroleum-based fuel that consists of alkyl esters derived from either the 
transesterification of triglycerides (TAG) or the esterification of free fatty acid (FFA) with low 
molecular weight alcohols. The flow and combustion properties of biodiesel are similar to 
petroleum based diesel and thus can be used either as a substitute diesel fuel or more commonly 
in fuel blends, so it’s called biodisel. Biodiesel is a very important and effective alternate fuel that 
can reduce the dependency on petroleum fuel. It’s a clean fuel , which can be used to reduce the 
emission pollution from diesel engines.In Bangladesh the potentiality of producing oil 
source is investigated and it is found that the production potential is not too high. As we 
have a very large population, the edible oil sources cannot be employed for the biodiesel 
production. Moreover we have extreme limitation of land. So additional land acquiring is 
also impossible for the production of oil seeds. The oil seed source that can be used for 
biodiesel production in Bangladesh are WCO, mustard oil, sesame oil, coconut oil, 
peanut oil, linseed oil, castor oil, nahor oil etc.    
   Biodiesel, having the chemical structure of fatty acid alkyl esters (usually methyl esters, 
FAME), is a clean burning fuel produced from renewable domestic sources such as vegetable oils 
and animal fat. It is biodegradable, non-inflammable, non-toxic and has a favorable combustion–
emission profile (Zheng et al., 2006). The interest in the use of renewable raw materials for fuel 
production started during the early 1990’s and one significant research has been the utilization of 
fatty acids esters derived from vegetable oils for biofuel production (Zheng et al., 2006 and 
Encinar et al., 2005). The most common oil sources are used for biodiesel production worldwide 
are waste cook oil, sunflower oil, corn oil, canola oil, soybean oil, castor oil, rapeseed oil, 
soybean soap stock, koroch seed oil, Sclerocarya birrea oil (SCO), melon bug oil (MBO), 
sorghum bug oil (SBO), cardoon (Cynara cardunculus L.), Gum copal (kauri resin), frying oil (a 
mixture of olive oil and sunflower oil), Karanja (Pongamia pinnata), Jatropha (Jatropha Curcas), 
Neem (Azadirachta indica), Mahua (Madhuca indica),Simarouba (Simarouba indica), Jojoba 
(Simmondsia chinensis Link Schneider) etc (Wang et al. 2009 and Sharma et al., 2008). Some of 
these sources are now used for the commercial production of biodiesel. The high cost of biodiesel 
is mainly due to the cost of virgin vegetable oil. Therefore, it is not surprising that the biodiesel 
produced from vegetable oil (for example, pure soybean oil) costs much more than petroleum 
based diesel. Therefore, it is necessary to explore ways to reduce production costs of biodiesel. In 
this sense, methods that permit minimizing the costs of the raw materials and production 
processes  are of special interest. The use of WCO, instead of virgin oil to produce biodiesel is an 
effective way to reduce the raw material cost because waste cook oil is estimated to be about half 
the price of virgin oil. The fact is so far, that only a very small percentage of these oils have been 
collected and used for soap production. In addition, the utilization of WCO diminishes the 
problems of contamination because the reusing of these WCO can reduce the burden of the 
government in disposing of the WCO, maintaining public sewers. 
   There are different methods for biodiesel preparation like base or acid catalyzed 
transesterification, two steps and three step methods. In base and acid catalyzed 
transesterification method biodiesel production yields were too low that’s why we used three 
steps method for biodiesel production. 
346 
 
   Biodiesel production by three step method (Morshed et al., 2011), where alcoholic sodium 
hydroxide was used for saponification so the process is very costly.  In the present paper 
alcoholic sodium hydroxide was replaced by aqueous solution of calcium oxide for low cost 
optimization of three step method. In the present study, the main ingredient for biodiesel 
preparation was waste cook oil (WCO) and CaO. Effect of different parameters such as 
FFA/methanol molar ratio, effect of silica gel on time, catalyst concentration and temperature  
has been studied and optimum parameters were found. 
 
2. Materials and Methods 
 
2.1. Chemicals  
 
Methanol (99-100%), ethanol (99-100%), calcium oxide (CaO), sodium hydroxide pellets (96%), 
potassium  hydroxide pellets (>84%), phenolphthalein (PH 8.2-9.8), acetone (99%), diethyl ether , 
hydrochloric acid (37%), sulfuric acid (98%), iodine , sodium iodide, bromine, carbon 
tetrachloride, glacial acetic acid, potassium dichromate etc. All the chemicals were used as 
analytical reagent grade. 
 
2.2. Waste Cook Oil 
 
Waste cook oil (palm oil ) was collected from local restaurants  located in Sylhet city in 
Bangladesh . The oil was filtered and its properties were measured. 
 
2.3. Biodiesel preparation by Three- step method 
 
2.3.1. Saponification 
 
For saponification process required amount of WCO was taken in a three necked flask and mixed 
with different stoichiometric amount of aqueous calcium oxide solution. The mixture was heated 
under reflux with vigorous stirring at temperature of 100 0C for different time. The reaction was 
stopped by cooling the reaction volume. Aqueous calcium oxide solution was prepared by 
dissolving required amount of dry calcium oxide (CaO) in 60-90 ml water. The reaction time and 
different molar ratio of oil to calcium oxide solution through saponification process were 
optimized. The Saponification reaction: 
 
CH2-OOC-R1                                                               ½ (R1COO)2C                CH2OH 
CH2-OOC-R2        +  3/2 Ca(OH)2                          ½(R2COO)2Ca       +    CH2OH 
CH2-OOC-R3                                                           ½(R3COO)2Ca             CH2OH 
(TG)                                                    (Soap)                             (Glycerin) 
R-COOH          +  Ca(OH)2                                  ½(R-COO)2Ca       +    H2O 
(FFA)                                                                       (Soap) 
Where R, R1, R2, R3 denoted any hydrocarbon chain. 
347 
 
2.3.2. Acidification  
 
After saponification, produced calcium soap solution was treated with different stoichiometric 
amount of concentrated hydrochloric acid at a temperature of 65 -70 0C under reflux with 
vigorous stirring. After dissolving the soap, the fatty acid contents were separated in separatory 
funnel. After separation, hot water wash was given for removing mineral acid from the fatty acid. 
The FFA content was determined by titration method. The different molar ratio of soap to 
hydrochloric acid was given and the ratio was optimized. 
 
In acidification step following reaction was occur: 
 
(R-COO)2Ca    +   2 HCl                              2R-COOH      +   CaCl2 
 
  (Soap)                                                          (FFA) 
 
2.3.3. Esterification of FFA 
 
When acidification was completed, produced FFA was reacted with different stoichiometric 
amount of methanol under reflux with vigorous stirring at different temperature, catalyst 
concentration, different molar ratio of FFA to methanol and different time. All the reaction 
parameters were optimized. Silica gel was used during esterification reaction to adsorb water 
produced in esterification reaction.  
  
During Esterification the following reaction occurs: 
 
R-COOH    +     CH3OH                    R-COOCH3    +   H2O 
  (FFA)              (Alcohol)                     (FAME) 
After preparing the biodiesel from WCO various physico-chemical properties were measured and 
compared with the standard biodiesel. 
 
The yield of biodiesel from raw oil by this method was calculated by the following 
equation:  
 
Yield =      
Where, W (biodiesel) was the weight of produced biodiesel and W(oil) was the weight of reacted 
oil. 
 
 
 
 
348 
 
2.4. Analytical methods for Oil and Biodiesel 
To determine FFA of sample and biodiesel, 1mL of oil  and biodiesel were weighed in g , then 
dispersed in 5mL diethyl-ether solution followed by titration against 0.1 M KOH (Jeffery et al., 
1991). Saponification value (SV) was determined by method described by Jeffery et al. (1991).To 
determined S.V. 2 gm sample was taken in 50 mL alcoholic KOH then heated with vigorous 
stirring at 65 °C  with vigorous stirring for 30 min and titrated against 0.5 M hydrochloric acid. 
The iodine value (IV) was determined by titrating the sample with 0.01 N sodium thiosulphate 
and chemical reagents until the disappearance of blue color. Iodine value was calculated by 
following equation: 
 
 IV = (V1-V2) *S*0.1269*100/ W                                                                                                 (1) 
 
V1 and V2 are the volume of sodium thiosulphate (mL) required for titration with sample and 
blank titration, S is the concentration of Na2S2O3 in Normality, W is the weight of oil sample in 
gm. Physical properties color, moisture content and density of the sample were by the following 
ASTM D 1500, ASTM D 1744 (Karl fisher method), ASTM D 1480/81 and ASTM D 240. 
Viscosity, cloud point, pour point were determined by standards ASTM D445 respectively 
 
3. Result and Discussion 
 
3.1. Characterization of WCO 
 
The properties of WCO such as viscosity, density, moisture content, saponification value, pour 
point, cloud point etc were measured and presented in Table 1. 
 
Table 1: properties of WCO: 
 
Properties Experimental  Value 
Color Yellowish 
Density(kg/m3),  at  25 oC 902 
Specific gravity, at 25 oC 0.902 
Kinematic viscosity (mm2/s), at 40oC 47.60 
Free fatty acid content (%FFA) 1.9 
Moisture content (%) 0.40 
Saponification value(mg KOH/mg 
oil) 
238 
Clod point(oC) 12 
Pour  point (oC) 6 
 
 
 
349 
 
3.2. Biodiesel Prepared by three step Method 
 
3.2.1. FFA Preparation 
 
FFA was prepared from WCO by saponification followed by acidification. Saponification was 
done by the method described above. After saponification and acidification FFA was produced. 
Saponification was done with different stoichiometric amount of CaO. The results are present in 
Figure 1.  
From the Figure 1 it can be seen that, the optimum molar ratio of oil to CaO was 1:2 and reaction 
time was 1.0 h.  
 
3.3. Biodiesel Preparation from FFA  
 
3.3.1. Effect of FFA/ methanol molar ratio 
 
The FFA/methanol   molar ratio is one of the important parameter that affecting the FFA 
conversion to methyl ester. The effect of methanol to FFA molar ratio on conversion of FFA was 
investigated at fixed temperature and catalyst concentration. The results are shown in Figure 2. 
From the Figure 2, it can be that the FFA conversion to biodiesel was 98.5% at the molar ratio of 
1:6, FFA to methanol. Further increase in FFA to methanol molar ratio conversion does not 
increase. The optimum molar ratio of FFA to methanol was 1:6. 
 
0 20 40 60 80 100 120
0
20
40
60
80
100
FF
A 
(%
)
Time (min)
 Oil:CaO=1:3
 Oil:CaO:1:2
 
Figure 1 Preparation of FFA from WCO through saponification and acidification by different 
stoichiometric molar ratio of CaO to oil in aqueous solution [Reaction temperature = 
100 0C under reflux with vigorous stirring] 
 
350 
 
 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
FF
A 
Co
nv
er
si
on
 (%
)
Methanol to FFA molar ratio
 
Figure 2 Effect of Methanol/FFA molar ratio on FFA conversion [temperature 60 oC, catalyst 
(HCl) 5 wt% of FFA, time 120 min under reflux with vigorous stirring]. 
3.3.2. Effect of catalyst concentration on esterification (HCl) 
 
Catalyst concentration has a significant role on conversion of FFA to methyl ester. Increase of 
catalyst concentration increases the percentage of FFA   conversion.  
1 2 3 4 5 6
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
C
on
ve
rs
io
n 
of
 F
FA
 (%
)
Catalyst Concentration (wt% of FFA)
 
Figure 3 Effect of catalyst concentration on esterification reaction [Reaction temperature = 60 0C, 
FFA / methanol ratio 1:6, Reaction time 120 min, under reflux with vigorous stirring]. 
At a certain catalyst concentration the conversion is high. The effect of catalyst (HCl) 
concentration on conversion of FFA was investigated the results are shown in figure 3. From the 
351 
 
Figure 3, it can be seen that the conversion was 99 % at the catalyst concentration of 5 wt% of 
HCl to FFA. Further increase in catalyst concentration the conversion does not increase. The 
optimum catalyst concentration was 5 wt% of HCl to FFA.  
 
3.3.3. Effect of silica gel on esterification reaction 
 
Silica gel adsorbs the water produced in esterification reaction. Hence increase the reaction rate. 
The effect of silica gel was studied in esterification reaction by taking 5 gm silica gel for 50 g 
FFA. Further increase in silica gel, the conversion remains unchanged. The results are presented 
in Figure 4. From the Figure 4, it can be seen that 99% conversion was achieved within 90 
minutes and reaction rate was increased but increasing time percentage conversion was not 
increased. 
 
0 20 40 60 80 100 120
0
20
40
60
80
100
Co
nv
er
si
on
 o
f F
FA
 (%
)
Time (min)
 With Silica gel
 Without Silica gel
 
Figure 4 Conversion of FFA to biodiesel at different FFA/ methanol molar ratio of FFA in 
absence and presence of silica gel [Reaction temp. 60 0C, Catalyst(HCl) concentration 
5.0% wt of FFA and Reaction time 2 h under reflux with vigorous stirring,]. 
3.3.4. Effect of Temperature 
 
Temperature has a significant effect on conversion of FFA to methyl ester. Increase of 
temperature increases the %FFA   conversion. At a certain temperature the conversion was high . 
The effect temperature on conversion of FFA was investigated the results are shown in Figure 5. 
From the Figure 5, it can be seen that the conversion was 99 % at 60 oC temperature. Further 
increase of temperature the percentage FFA   conversion does not increase. The optimum 
temperature was 60 oC. 
 
352 
 
20 30 40 50 60 70
20
40
60
80
100
Co
nv
er
si
on
 o
f F
FA
 (%
)
Temperature (0C)
 
 Figure 5 Effect of Temperature on esterification reaction [Catalyst concentration 5 wt% to FFA, 
FFA methanol ratio 1:6, Reaction time 120 min, under reflux with vigorous stirring]. 
 
3.4. Properties of biodiesel 
 
Properties of produced biodiesel by three step method and comparison with biodiesel standard are 
given in Table 2.The quality of biodiesel is determined by measuring some properties such as 
cetane index which indicates ignition characteristic. 
 
Table 2: Properties of biodiesel produced from WCO by three step method and comparison with 
standard biodiesel and diesel. 
 
Properties Produced biodiesel 
value 
Biodiesel Standard 
(Morshed et. Al., 
2011 and Joshi and 
Pegg, 2007) 
Diesel standard (Joshi 
et. al., 2007) 
Specific gravity, at 25 
oC 
0.831 0.88 (at 15.50 C) 0.85(at 15.50 C) 
Kinematic viscosity 
(mm2/s), at 40oC 
3.93 1.9–6.0 1.3 – 4.1 
Density(kg/m3),  at  
25 oC 
831 880 (at 15.50 C) 850 (at 15.50 C) 
Free fatty acid 
content (%FFA 
0.52 - - 
Moisture content (%) 0.10 0.05% max. 0.161 
Saponification value 187 - - 
Flash point (0C) 150 100 to 170 60 to 80 
Iodine value 84 - - 
Cloud point (oC) 2 -3 to 12 -15 to 5 
353 
 
 
 
The properties of produced biodiesel such as density, viscosity, FFA content, moisture content, 
pour point, cloud point, saponification value, iodine value, specific gravity were measured and 
compared with standard value. The reaction yield was 73.5%. 
 
4. Conclusion   
 
Biodiesel was synthesized from WCO by three-steps method, in three step method aqueous 
calcium oxide solution was used for saponification . molar ratio of oil to CaO and reaction time 
was optimized. The optimum molar ratio for saponification by aqueous calcium oxide was 1:2 oil 
to CaO and reaction time 60  minutes at 100 0C. In acidification the molar ratio of soap to 
hydrochloric acid was 1:2 for calcium soap. In Esterification the optimum molar ratio of FFA to 
methanol was 1:6, the catalyst concentration is 5 wt% of HCl to FFA, the reaction temperature 
was 650C and the reaction time was 2 hour, with silica gel reaction time was reduced to 90 min 
and FFA content was reduced to 0.5 %. The properties of biodiesel such as density, viscosity, 
specific gravity, cloud point, pour point, flash point, cetane number are nearest to the petro diesel. 
The present experimental results support that produced biodiesel from WCO can be successfully 
used as diesel. 
 
References 
 
Encinar, Jose´ M., Gonzalez, Juan F., and Rodrıguez-Reinares, Antonio, (2005).  Biodiesel from 
Used Frying Oil. Variables Affecting the Yields and Characteristics of the Biodiesel. 
Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research. 44: 5491-5499. 
Jeffery, G.H., Bassett, J., Mendham, J., Denney, R.C., Vogel’s Textbook of Quantitative 
Chemical Analysis, (1991). 5th ed., Longman Scientific and Technical, UK. 
Joshi, R.M and Pegg, M.J, (2007). Flow properties of biodiesel fuel blends at low temperatures. 
Fuel,  86: 143-151. 
Morshed, Mahbub, Ferdous, Kaniz, Khan, Maksudur R., Mazumder, M.S.I.,  Islam, M.A. and 
Uddin, Md. T., (2011). Rubber seed oil as a potential source for biodiesel production in 
Bangladesh. Fuel, 90:. 2981-2986. 
Sharma, Y.C.  B. Singh , S.N. Upadhyay, “Advancements in development and characterization of 
biodiesel: A review”, Fuel ,vol. 87 , pp.2355–2373, 2008 
Wang, Yong, Wang, Xingguo, Liu, Yuanfa, Ou, Shiyi, Tan, Yanlai and Tang, Shuze, (2009).  
Refining of biodiesel by ceramic membrane separation . Fuel Processing Technology, 90:  
422–427. 
 Zheng, S., Kates, M., Dube, M.A.  and McLean, D.D., (2006). Acid-catalyzed production of 
biodiesel from waste frying oil. Biomass & Bioenergy,  30: 267-272. 
 
  
Pour  point (oC) 0 -15 to 10 -35 to -15 
Cetane Index 52 - - 
354 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
PREPARATION OF BIODIESEL FROM SOYBEAN OIL BY USING 
HETEROGENEOUS CATALYST 
 
 
M. Rakib Uddin1 Kaniz Ferdous2, Maksudur R. Khan3, Md. Jahangir Alam4 and M. A. Islam5 
 
 
ABSTRACT: The predicted shortage of fossil fuels and related environmental concerns has 
recently attracted significant attention to search alternative fuel. Biodiesel is one of the 
alternatives to fossil fuel. Now-a-days, most biodiesel is produced by the transesterification of 
oils using methanol and a homogeneous base catalyst. The use of homogeneous catalysts is 
normally limited to batch mode processing followed by a catalyst separation step. The immiscible 
glycerol phase, which accumulates during the course of the reaction, solubilizes the 
homogeneous base catalyst and therefore, withdraws from the reaction medium. Moreover, other 
difficulties of using homogeneous base catalysts relate to their sensitivity to free fatty acid (FFA) 
and water and resulting saponification phenomenon. High energy consumption and costly 
separation of the catalyst from the reaction mixture have inspired the use of heterogeneous 
catalyst. The use of heterogeneous catalysts does not lead to the formation of soaps through 
neutralization of FFA and saponification of oil. In the present paper, biodiesel was prepared from 
crude (soybean) oil by transesterification reaction using heterogeneous base catalyst name 
calcium oxide (CaO). Various reaction parameters were optimized and the biodiesel properties 
were evaluated. 
 
Keywords: Calcium oxide; Catalyst; Viscosity; Transesterification and Biodiesel. 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Majority of the worlds energy needs are supplied through petrochemical sources, coal and natural 
gases, with the exception of hydroelectricity and nuclear energy, of all, these sources are finite 
and at current usage rates will be consumed shortly (Srivastava et al., 2000). Diesel fuels have an 
                                                        
1Lecturer, Department of Chemical Engineering and Polymer Science, Shahjalal University of Science and 
Technology, Sylhet, Banhladesh. mruddincep@gmail.com 
2Ph.D student, Department of Chemical Engineering and Polymer Science, Shahjalal University of Science 
and Technology, Sylhet, Banhladesh. engr_kaniz@yahoo.com 
3Professor, Department of Chemical Engineering and Polymer Science, Shahjalal University of Science and 
Technology, Sylhet, Bangladesh and Associate Professor, Faculty of Chemical and Natural Resources, 
University Malaysia Pahang, 26300 Gambang, Kuantan, Pahang, Malaysia. mrkhancep@yahoo.com 
4 Department of Chemical Engineering and Polymer Science, Shahjalal University of Science and 
Technology, Sylhet, Banhladesh. jahangir_kf@yahoo.com 
5Professor, Department of Chemical Engineering and Polymer Science, Shahjalal University of Science and 
Technology, Sylhet, Bangladesh. islamsust@yahoo.com 
355 
 
essential function in the industrial economy of a developing country and used for transport of 
industrial and agricultural goods and operation of diesel tractor and pump sets in agricultural 
sector. Economic growth is always accompanied by commensurate increase in the transport. The 
high energy demand in the industrialized world as well as in the domestic sector, and pollution 
problems caused due to the widespread use of fossil fuels make it increasingly necessary to 
develop the renewable energy sources of limitless duration and smaller environmental impact 
than the traditional one. This has stimulated recent interest in alternative sources for petroleum-
based fuels. An alternative fuel must be technically feasible, economically competitive, 
environmentally acceptable, and readily available. One possible alternative to fossil fuel is the 
use of oils of plant origin like vegetable oils and tree borne oil seeds.  
   Vegetable oil is one of the biomass resources and is used as a feedstock of an alternative to 
fossil diesel fuel. The alternative fuel, which is termed as ‘‘Biodiesel’’, consists of fatty acid 
methyl esters produced by transesterifying vegetable oil with methanol (Ma and Hanna, 1999). In 
addition to the renewable nature peculiar to the biomass resources, biodiesel has another 
advantage of the good fuel properties: high flash point, good lubricity and so on (Dorado et al., 
2003 and Lin et al., 2006). In 2003, European Community has decided to replace at least 5.75% 
of the yearly consumed fossil fuels with biofuels, by the year 2010. This decision accelerated the 
use of biodiesel and its production has been constantly growing. The total of biodiesel yearly 
produced in the world was 7.75 million metric tons in 2008 (Knothe, 2010). 
For the existent biodiesel production process, vegetable oil is transesterified with the help of 
homogeneous base catalysis of alkali hydroxide dissolved in methanol. The base-catalyzed 
transesterification is faster than the acid-catalyzed one for which sulfonic acid or p-
toluenesulfonic acid is employed (Nimcevic et al., 2000).  
   However, for the existent process, these are some technological problems resulting in costly 
production of biodiesel. The typical problem is a massive amount of the waste water, which is 
due to the purification to wash the homogeneous catalyst off the crude biodiesel with water. And 
besides, emulsification of biodiesel occurs during the purifying operation, which causes not only 
obstruction of the process operation but also loss of biodiesel. 
   With a view of resolving the technological problems mentioned above, Kusudiana and Saka 
studied a catalyst-free process in which vegetable oil was transesterified with super-critical 
methanol (Kusudiana and Saka, 2001 and 2004). It took only 4 min. to convert rapeseed oil into 
biodiesel, even though the high temperature (523–673 K) and high pressure (35–60 MPa) were 
required for making methanol reach the supercritical state. The very fast transesterification was 
due to the large solubility of vegetable oil in super-critical methanol and intensified nucleophilic 
nature of super-critical methanol. Apart from the catalyst-free process, the enzymatic process can 
be applied to biodiesel production (Nelson et al., 1996, Shimada et al., 1999 and Iso et al., 2001). 
Although biocatalyst consisting of lipase allows vegetable oil to be transesterified into its methyl 
esters at room temperature, it takes more than 24 h t o achieve the perfect conversion (Oda et al., 
2001). 
   Solid base can leads to the heterogeneous catalytic process, which promises the cost reasonable 
biodiesel production. Since the solid base catalyst is easy to separate from the transesterified 
product. The solid base catalyst is active in the transesterification at the temperature around 
boiling point of methanol. For the purpose of studying the heterogeneous catalytic process, many 
researchers tested a variety of solid base for the catalytic activity. Xie et al. prepared potassium 
loaded on alumina as the solid base catalyst and the prepared catalyst was employed for 
transesterification of soybean oil at reflux of methanol (Xie et al., 2006). Under the same 
transesterifying condition, they examined the solid base catalysis of the magnesium–aluminum 
356 
 
(Mg–Al) mixed oxide that was prepared by calcining the corresponding hydrotalcite (Xie et al., 
2006). Shibasaki-Kitagawa et al. elucidated that anion-exchange resin catalyzed a 
transesterification of triolein which is a model of vegetable oil (Shibasaki-Kitagawa et al., 2007). 
   From the economical point of view, we have focused our attentions on calcium oxide (CaO) as 
a candidate for the solid base catalyst. A major source of calcium oxide is limestone having the 
advantages of good availability and cheap cost. Moreover, calcium oxide can be prepared from 
the waste matters consisting of calcium carbonate, such as mollusk shells. The use of the waste 
matters is not only effective in enhancing the cost advantage of CaO catalyst but also related to 
recycle of the naturally mineral resources.  
   In this paper, biodiesel was prepared from soybean oil by heterogeneous solid catalyst e.g. 
CaO. A new method for biodiesel conversion measurement was developed. The reaction 
parameters were optimized. The kinetics of CaO-catalyzed transesterification of soybean oil and 
methanol was researched. The reaction rate constant (k) at optimal reaction condition was 
determined. A pseudo-first order kinetic model was proposed for the system and the experimental 
data are fitted in this model.   
 
 
2.  Methods 
 
2.1 Materials 
 
Soybean oil was obtained from City Oil Mill (City group Bangladesh Ltd.). The soybean oil was 
of the 875.3 g mol-1 average molar mass having the following fatty acid distribution: alpha-
Linolenic acid (C-18:3) 7–10%;  linoleic acid (C-18:2) 51%; and  oleic acid (C-18:1) 23%. It also 
contains the saturated fatty acids stearic acid 4%  and  palmitic acid 10% (Poth, 2002). CaO was 
obtained from Merk (Germany) Ltd. Methanol (technical pure) was supplied by Merk (Germany) 
Ltd. Sodium hydroxide, hydrochloric acid, iso-propanol, potassium hydroxide were purchased 
from Merk(India) Ltd. All the reagents were analytical grade. 
 
 
2.2. Purification of raw oil 
 
Raw crude soybean oil contains gum, coloring materials and other impurities. To remove these 
impurities from the crude oil adsorption technique was applied. For this purpose, a column 
adsorption technique was applied. In a column active charcoal was placed and oil was passed 
through this column. Typically 20 gm active charcoal was placed in a column of 1 inch diameter 
and oil was passed under vacuum. 
  
 
2.3. Catalyst preparation 
 
Catalyst was prepared from reagent grade CaO. For this purpose 50 gm of CaO was taken in a 
beaker and immersed with 0.4 M HCl for 24.0 hr. Then filtered this for the separation of CaO and 
given water wash to remove acid content. This was examined by the titration of the filtrate by a 
base solution in presence of phenolphathalin as an indicator. After the removal of acid the pure 
CaO was immersed in 0.4 M NaOH solution for 24.0 hr. After that period the catalyst was 
357 
 
filtered and washed until neutralized water found. The impurities free CaO was dried in a oven 
for 2.0 hr at 1000 C.  
 
2.4. Calibration curve for determining conversion by viscosity method 
 
Biodiesel conversion can be measured by different methods. Zhang et. al. (2010) measured the 
biodiesel conversion by GC analysis and Kusdiana and Saka (2001) measured the biodiesel 
conversion by HPLC method. Here a new technique was proposed for biodiesel yield 
measurement e.g. viscosity measurement method. At first certain amount of soybean oil 
undergoes base catalyzed transesterification reaction, described by Saydut et. al. (2008) and 
biodiesel was produced. This produced biodiesel were separates and again undergoes base 
catalyzed transesterification and the produced biodiesel was assumed 100% biodiesel and 
viscosity was measured. Then different proportion of raw soybean oil was blended with produced 
biodiesel and the viscosity of each blend was measured. And the percentage conversion was 
calculated from the viscosity change. Viscosity versus percentage conversion plot was presented 
in Figuree 1 which used for the determination of conversion giving transesterification reaction. 
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
 
Vi
sc
os
ity
 (m
m
2 /s
)
Conversion of Triglyceride (%)
 
 
Figure 1 Viscosity Vs Conversion of Biodiesel. [Viscosity measured at 40C, Reaction temp. 
60C, oil / methanol ratio 1:6, Catalyst (NaOH) concentration 1% wt of oil, under reflux 
with vigorous stirring, Reaction time 90 min.] 
 
 
2.5. Transesterification of soybean oil with methanol 
 
A 500 ml three-neck glass flask with a magnetic stirrer, a watercooled condenser, and a 
thermometer was used for the transesterification reaction. Typically, soybean oil (43.8 g, 0.05 
mol) and methanol (19.3 g, 0.60 mol) were displaced into the flask at a predetermined 
temperature. To the stirred solution, CaO (3.51 g, 0.063 mol) was added to initiate the reaction. 
At the end of reaction, the catalyst was removed by filtration and the residual methanol was 
separated from the biodiesel by vacuum distillation.  
 
358 
 
2.6. Kinetics Experiment 
 
Kinetics experiments were performed in a 1000 ml four-necked flask equipped with a magnetic 
stirrer, a water-cooled condenser, a thermometer and a sampling port. The molar ratio of 
methanol to soybean oil and the catalyst amount were fixed under the optimal condition (molar 
ratio of methanol to soybean oil: 12:1; catalyst amount: 8.0%). The total reaction volume was 380 
ml and was regarded as constant during transesterification process considering the volume of 
samples withdrawn was no more than 1% of the total reaction volume. Sample was filtered 
through filter paper to separate catalyst. Viscosity of the sample was measured and hence the 
reaction conversion was measured.  
 
2.7. Analytical Methods for Oil and Biodiesel 
 
FFA in the oil and biodiesel samples was analyzed by the method described in AOCS Aa 6-38. To 
determine FFA of sample, 4-5 g of samples were dispersed in isopropanol (75 ml) and hexane (15 
ml) followed by titration against 0.25 N NaOH. Saponification value (SV) was determined by the 
method described by Jeffery et al., (1991) 1gm sample was taken with 25 ml alcoholic KOH, 
heated for one hour in a steam bath with occasional shaking and titrated the excess KOH with the 
0.5 M hydrochloric acid. The iodine value (IV) were determined by titrating 0.01 N sodium 
thiosulfate to the mixture of tested fuel and chemical reagents until the disappearance of the blue 
color based on the analysis methods of American Oil Chemist’s Society. IV was calculated by the 
following Eq. 1: 
 
Iodine value = (B-S) x N x 0.001269/W   
          
(1) 
 
where S and B are the amounts (in unit of ml) of sodium thiosulfate titrated for the tested sample 
and blank sample, respectively; N is the molar concentration (in unit of mol/L) of sodium 
thiosulfate; and W is the weight (in unit of g) of the tested sample. 
Physical properties such as color, moisture content and density of the oil were determined by 
following ASTM D 1500, ASTM D 1744 (Karl fisher method), ASTM D 1480/81 and ASTM D 
240 respectively. Viscosity, flash point, pour point and cloud point were determined by standards 
ASTM D445, ASTM D 93 (Pensky- Martens Flashpoint Apparatus, Lazer Scientific Inc, 
Germany), ASTM D 2500 and ASTM D 97 respectively.  
 
 
3. Result and discussion 
 
3.1 Characterization of soybean oil 
 
The properties, such as the specific gravity, kinematic viscosity, free fatty acid content, moisture 
content, saponification value, ester value, iodine value, odor, color was measured by the methods 
was mentioned above and presented in Table 1.  
 
 
 
 
359 
 
Table 1: Raw material (Soybean oil) Specification 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.2. Study of reaction system 
 
It is well known that methanol is polar solvent. In our study, CaO was used as a catalyst. . 
Because the presence of catalyst in solution implies a contribution of the homogeneous reaction, 
it is necessary to evaluate the catalyst CaO against dissolution in this reaction medium. In order 
to evaluate the contribution of soluble species to the overall catalytic activity, the conversion of 
oil to biodiesel after removing of catalyst was also studied as shown in Figure 2. It was obvious 
that the conversion of oil to biodiesel increased with increasing of reaction time. Once we 
removed the catalyst from the reaction medium after 2.0 h of reaction, the conversion of oil to 
biodiesel was not enhanced anymore, from which we could conclude that the soluble species was 
negligible and had no effect on the overall catalytic activity. The base catalyst CaO could be used 
as heterogeneous catalyst in the reaction system generally. 
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
C
on
ve
rs
io
n 
of
 o
il 
to
 b
io
di
es
el
 (%
)
Time (hr)
 Without removal of CaO
 Removal of CaO after 120 min reaction
 
Figure 2 Study of solubility of CaO in methanol by measuring biodiesel conversion after removal 
of catalyst [Reaction temperature 650 C, molar ratio of oil to methanol = 1:12, catalyst 
concentration 8 wt% of oil, under reflux with vigorous stirring]. 
 
 
 
Property name Value 
Specific gravity, at 25C 0.92 
Kinematic viscosity (mm2/s ), at 40C 52.0 
Kinematic viscosity (mm2/s) at 40C after 
adsorption 
50.0  
Free fatty acid content (%) 4.5 
Moisture content (%) 0.08 
Saponification value (mg KOH/gm oil) 194 
Iodine value 120  
Odor Mild flavor 
360 
 
3.2 Transesterification reaction 
 
Transesterification of soybean oil with methanol by heterogeneous catalyst is relatively slow and 
needs activation either by high temperature to achieve a higher conversion. All the reactions were 
carried out at refluxing temperature. Effects of reaction parameters on the conversion of biodiesel 
were explored as follows. 
 
3.3.1. Effect of oil to methanol molar ratio 
The oil to methanol molar ratio is one of the most important variables affecting the conversion of 
transesterification reaction of soybean oil to biodiesel. It was evident that the transesterification 
of soybean oil required three molars of methanol for each mole of oil. Since the reaction was a 
reversible reaction, methanol was used in huge excess with respect to soybean oil in order to 
drive the reaction towards the formation of biodiesel. As can be seen from Figure 3, the biodiesel 
conversion increased with increasing of the molar ratio of methanol to oil over the range from 3:1 
to 12:1. The highest conversion (88.8%) was obtained at the molar ratio of 12:1 for 8 h. With 
further increasing of the molar ratio, a little decrease in the biodiesel conversion was observed. 
This effect could be attributed to that excessive methanol dilute the concentration of oil in the 
reaction system, thus reducing the frequency of collision of soybean oil and the catalyst CaO. 
Therefore, the optimal molar ratio of methanol and soybean oil was to be 12:1. 
6 8 10 12 14
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Co
nv
er
si
on
 (%
)
Molar ratio of methanol to oil
 
Figure 3 : Conversion of soybean oil to biodiesel at different methanol to oil molar ratio 
[Reaction temp. 65C,  Catalyst concentration 8% wt of oil, vigorous stirring, Reaction 
time 8.0 hr]. 
 
3.2.2. Effect of catalyst concentration on transesterification 
The conversion of soybean oil to biodiesel is greatly affected by catalyst concentration. The effect 
of the amount of catalyst on the conversion was investigated within the range of 3.0-12.0% CaO 
(based on the oil weight) and the results are illustrated in Figure 4. It was found that, the biodiesel 
conversion was not more than 10% when the catalyst amount was less than 5.0%. As we all 
know, the catalytic activity was extremely influenced by alkalinity and the amount of basic sites. 
When CaO was used as the catalyst, the more of the catalyst amount, the more of the basic sites, 
which is favorable for biodiesel conversion. With increasing of the amount of catalyst from 5.0% 
361 
 
to 8.0%, the conversion of biodiesel increased rapidly, which could be attributed to the 
availability of more basic sites.  
2 4 6 8 10 12
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
C
on
ve
rs
io
n 
(%
)
Catalyst Concentration (wt% of oil)
 
Figure 4: Conversion of soybean oil to biodiesel at different catalyst concentration [Reaction 
temp. 65C, oil to methanol ratio 1:12, vigorous stirring, Reaction time 8 h]. 
 
When the catalyst amount was above 8.0%, the conversion of biodiesel was almost not enhanced 
anymore, indicating that the catalyst amount was enough for the transesterification of soybean oil. 
Too much catalyst could only make the mixture of reactants too viscous, leading to the problem 
of mixing and separation. In order to avoid this problem and reduce the costs, the optimum 
amount of the catalyst was to be 8.0% CaO (on the basis of oil weight). 
 
3.2.3. Effect of temperature on transesterification 
Temperature is another important variable that effecting the conversion of oil to biodiesel and the 
conversion increases with increasing of temperature. Usually higher temperature is required for 
hetero generous catalysed transesterification system. The reaction was conducted from 40-700C 
temperature and the results are represented in Figure 5. When the reaction temperature was less 
than 400 C the conversion was less than 30%. With increasing the temperature from 400 C to 650 
C the conversion of biodiesel increased rapidly. When the temperature was above 650 C the 
conversion of biodiesel was almost not enhanced anymore, indicating that the temperature was 
enough for the transesterification of soybean oil. The optimum temperature was to be 650 C. 
 
3.2.5. Effect of reaction time on the conversion of oil to biodiesel 
The effect of reaction time on the conversion of biodiesel at the catalysis of CaO was studied and 
the results are shown in Figure 6. The reaction time was varied within the range from 0 h to 10 h. 
A gradual increase in the biodiesel conversion was observed with the increasing of time up to 8 h 
, and then remained nearly constant. The optimum reaction time was 8 h, at which the highest 
biodiesel conversion could reach 88.9%. 
 
362 
 
40 45 50 55 60 65 70
15
30
45
60
75
90
C
on
ve
rs
io
n 
(%
)
Temperature (0C)
 
Figure 5 :conversion of soybean oil to biodiesel at different temperature [oil to methanol ratio 
1:12, catalyst concentration 8.0% CaO, under reflux with vigorous stirring, Reaction 
time 8 h]. 
 
0 2 4 6 8 10
0
20
40
60
80
100
C
on
ve
rs
io
n 
(%
)
Time (hr)
 
Figure 6: conversion of soybean oil to biodiesel at different reaction time [oil to methanol ratio 
1:12, reaction temperature 650 C, catalyst concentration 8.0% CaO, under reflux with 
vigorous stirring]. 
 
 
3.4. Kinetic study 
 
The overall transesterification reaction can be written in following form 
 
TG (oil) + 3* Methanol  ↔ 3* ME (biodiesel) + G (Glycerin) 
 
363 
 
This reaction is assumed to proceed in the pseudo first-order reaction as a function of the 
conversion of oil (TG). The equilibrium constant can be determined by the following relationship 
2
1
1 k
k
X
X
C
C
K
TGe
TGe
TGe
Ge 

  
(2) 
where, TGeX  is the equilibrium conversion of TG 
The rate expression can be expressed as below, 
TGTGTGTG
TG
TG
TGG XCkXCk
dt
dX
C
dt
dC
dt
dC
02010 )1(   
(3) 
Substituting equation (2) in to (3) we get, 
)1[1 TG
TG aXk
dt
dX
  
(4) 
where, 
K
a 11  
By integrating Equation (4)we get, 
tkaXLn
a TG 1
)1(1   
(5) 
Or,  
))(1(1 1atkExpa
X TG   
(6) 
A plot )1(1 TGaXLna
 vs. t gives a straight line, as shown in Figure 7 and 1k  is determined 
from the slop of the line and the value was 0.470 hr-1. The value of equilibrium constant was 
determined from the experiment and the value was 21.22. The value of 2k  is determined from 
Equation (2) and the value was 0.022 hr-1. 
The theoretical conversion vs time is determined by putting the values of the rate constants and 
concentrations at different time in Equation (3). The theoretical and experimental kinetic plot is 
presented in Figure 8.  It can be seen that the overall reaction follows the pseudo first-order 
reaction kinetics. 
 
0 2 4 6 8
0
1
2
3
4
5
Y=0.470X
(-1
/a
) l
n(
1-
aX
TG
)
Time (hr)
 
Figure 7 Determination of k1 at optimal reaction condition 
364 
 
 
0 2 4 6 8
0
20
40
60
80
C
on
ve
rs
io
n 
(%
)
Time (hr)
 Experimental line
 Theoretical line
 
Figure 8 Conversion of biodiesel-Time curve for transesterification reaction [Reaction temp. 
65C, oil to methanol ratio 1:12, Catalyst concentration 8.0% wt. of oil, under reflux 
with vigorous stirring with vigorous stirring]. 
 
3.5. Properties of biodiesel 
 
Properties of the produced biodiesel and comparison with biodiesel standard are given in Table 2.  
 
Table 2: Properties of biodiesel produced from soybean oil and comparison with standard value 
 
Properties Produced biodiesel 
value 
Biodiesel Standard 
(Morshed et. Al., 
2011 and Joshi and 
Pegg, 2007) 
Diesel standard 
(Joshi et. al., 2007) 
Specific gravity, at 25 
oC 
0.85 0.88 (at 15.50 C) 0.85(at 15.50 C)  
Kinematic viscosity 
(mm2/s), at 40oC 
5.4 1.9–6.0 1.3 – 4.1 
Free fatty acid content 
(%FFA) 
0.5 - - 
Calorific value (Mj/Kg) 38.2 37.5 42 
Moisture content (%) 0.12 0.05% max. 0.161 
Flash point (0C) 135 100 to 170 60 to 80 
Cloud point (oC) -3 -3 to 12 -15 to 5 
Pour  point (oC) -6 -15 to 10 -35 to -15 
Iodine value 88 - - 
Saponification value 194 - - 
Cetane no 48 - - 
 
 
 
365 
 
4. Conclusion 
 
In the present study, CaO was identified as an effective heterogeneous catalyst for the 
transesterification of soybean oil and methanol. The effects of reaction conditions (molar ratio of 
methanol to soybean oil, catalyst concentration, reaction temperature and reaction time) on 
biodiesel conversion were studied and the optimum condition was identified, which could provide 
valuable experimental data for future industrial application. Kinetics of this CaO-catalyzed 
transesterification reaction was investigated at optimal reaction condition. Finally biodiesel was 
produced at the optimum condition and the physical properties of the produced biodiesel were 
evaluated and compared with biodiesel and petro-diesel standard.  
 
References 
 
Dorado, M.P., Ballesteros, E., Arnal, J.M., Gomez, J., Lopez, F.J., (2003). Exhaust emissions 
from a     diesel engine fueled with transesterified waste olive oil. Fuel, 82:1311–1315. 
Iso, M., Chen, B., Eguchi, M., Kubo, T. and Shrestha, S., (2001). Production of biodiesel fuel 
from triglycerides and alcohol using immobilized lipase. Journal of Molecular Catalysis B: 
Enzymatic, 16:53–58. 
Jeffery, G.H., Bassett, J., Mendham, J., Denney, R.C., Vogel’s Textbook of Quantitative Chemical 
Analysis, (1991). 5th ed., Longman Scientific and Technical, UK. 
Joshi, R.M and Pegg, M.J, (2007). Flow properties of biodiesel fuel blends at low temperatures. 
Fuel,  86: 143-151, 2007. 
Knothe, G., (2010). Biodiesel: current trends and properties. Journal of Catalysis, 53:714–720. 
 Kusudiana, D. and Saka, S., (2004). Effect of water on biodiesel fuel production bysupercritical 
methanol treatment. Bioresource Technology, 91:289–295. 
Kusudiana, D., and Saka, S., (2001). Kinetics of transesterification in rapeseed oil to biodieselfuel 
as treated in supercritical methanol. Fuel, 80:693–698. 
Lin, C.Y., Lin, H.A. and Hung, L.B., (2006). Fuel structure and properties of biodiesel produced 
by peroxidation process. Fuel,86:1743–1749. 
Ma, F., Hanna, H. A., (1999). Biodiesel production: a review. Bioresource Technology, 70:1–15. 
Morshed, Mahbub, Ferdous, Kaniz, Khan, Maksudur R., Mazumder, M.S.I., Islam M.A.  and 
Uddin, Md. T., (2011) Rubber seed oil as a potential source for biodiesel production in 
Bangladesh, Fuel, 90,: 2981-2986. 
Nelson, L.A., Foglia, T.A. and Marmer, W.N., (1996). Lipase-catalyzed production of biodiesel. 
Amrican Oil Chemist Society, 73:1191–1195. 
Nimcevic, D., Puntigam, R., Worgetter, M. and Gapes, J.R., (2000). Preparation of rapeseed oil 
esters of lower aliphatic alcohols.  Amrican Oil Chemist Society, 77:275–280. 
Oda, M., Kaieda, M., Hama, S., Yamaji, H., Kondo, A., Izumoto, E., et al., (2005). Facilitatory 
effect of immobilized lipase-producing Rhizopus oryzae cells on acyl migration in 
biodiesel-fuel production. Biochemical Engineering, 23:45–51. 
Official Methods and Recommended Practices of the American Oil Chemists Society, (1998). 5th 
ed, AOCS Press, Champaign. 6-38. 
Saydut, Abdurrahman, Duz, M.Zahir, Kaya, Canan, Kafadar,  Aylin, Beycar and Hamamc, 
Candan, (2008). Transesterified sesame seed oil as a biodiesel fuel. Bioresource Technology, 
99: 6656–6660. 
366 
 
Shibasaki-Kitagawa, N., Honda, H., Kuribayashi, H., Toda, T., Fukumura, T. and Yonemoto, T., 
(2007). Biodiesel production using anionic ion-exchange resin as heterogeneous catalyst. 
Bioresource Technology, 98:416–421. 
Shimada, Y., Watanabe, W., Samukawa, T., Sugihara, T.A., Noda, H., Fukuda, H., et al., (1999). 
Conversion of vegetable oil to biodiesel using immobilized Candia antarctica lipase. 
Amrican Oil Chemist Society, 76:789–793. 
Srivastava, A. and Prasad, R., (2000). Triglycerides-based diesel fuels. Renewable and 
Sustainable Energy     Reviews,4:111–133. 
Ulrich, Poth, (2002). "Drying Oils and Related Products" in Ullmann's Encyclopedia of Industrial 
Chemistry Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,Germany, 2002.pp-09-55.  
 Xie W., Peng H. and Chen L., (2006). Calcined Mg–Al hydrotalcites as solid base catalysts for 
methanolysis of soybean oil. Journal of Molecular Catalysis A: Chemical, 246:24–32. 
Xie, W., Peng, H. and Chen, L., (2006). Transesterification of soybean oil catalyzed by potassium 
loaded on alumina as a solid-base catalyst. Applied Catalysis A: General, 300:67–74. 
Zhang, Liping, Sheng, Boyang, Xin, Zhong, Liu, Qun and Sun, Shuzhen, (2010). Kinetics of 
transesterification of palm oil and dimethyl carbonate for biodiesel production at the 
catalysis of heterogeneous base catalyst. Bioresource Technology, 101: 8144-8150. 
 
 
 
367 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
BIOELECTRICITY GENERATION FROM FOOD PROCESSING INDUSTRY 
WASTEWATER THROUGH DUAL CHAMBER MFC 
 
Rajarshi Roy Raju1, Kamrul Islam1, M. S. A. Amin2, Kaniz Ferdous1, Maksudur R. Khan3 
. 
ABSTRACT: Microbial fuel cell (MFC) is an attractive renewable and sustainable technology to 
meet up the drastic energy crisis of the world through waste water treatment. This 
bioelectrochemical system (BES) converts biomass spontaneously into electricity by the 
metabolic activity of the microorganisms. Food processing industry generally discharges large 
volume of wastewater whichcreates adverse financial and ecological impact to the industry and 
environment. In this present contribution electricity production from food processing industry 
wastewater, as substrates in MFCs, was investigated. Dual chambered mediator-less MFC was 
designed and fabricated using locally available materials. Performance of the MFC was evaluated 
by measuring potential parameters, such as current generation, current density, voltage change, 
change in pH, change in COD and effect of feed pH at different operating conditions. Current 
generation increased with increasing sludge loading, and maximum results were recorded as 
90µA with 9gm of sludge and optimum pH value 8 in anode chamber. This study documented a 
maximum power density of 7.42mW/m2 with the corresponding current density of 25mA/m2. 
Keywords: Microbial Fuel Cell, Mediator-less MFC, Wastewater treatment, Bio-electricity, 
Electricity generation, Polarization, COD. 
 
 
1.Introduction 
 
The severely increased demand of finite fossil sources of energy (i.e., coal, petroleum, and 
natural gas); overwhelming climate changes due to air pollution; and the current escalation of 
energy cost considerably motivate the research toward searching new alternative energy 
production approaches. Along with this severe energy crisis, wastewater treatment is  also a big 
issue for present world .Wastewater discharged through agricultural and food operations have 
distinctive characteristics that set it apart from common municipal wastewater managed by public 
or private wastewater treatment plants. It is biodegradable and nontoxic, but that has high 
                                                        
1Student, Department of Chemical Engineering and Polymer Science, Shahjalal University of Science and 
Technology, Sylhet-3114, Bangladesh. raju_cep@yahoo.com 
2Lecturer, Department of Chemical Engineering and Polymer Science, Shahjalal University of Science and 
Technology, Sylhet-3114, Bangladesh.  saikat_cep@yahoo.com  
3Professor, Department of Chemical Engineering and Polymer Science, Shahjalal University of Science 
and Technology, Sylhet-3114, Bangladesh. makhancep@yahoo.com 
 
 
368 
 
concentrations of biochemical oxygen demand (BOD), chemical oxygen demand (COD) and 
suspended solids (SS). Processing food for sale produces wastes generated from cooking which 
are often rich in plant organic material and may also contain salt, flavorings, coloring material 
and acids or alkali. Very significant quantities of oil or fats may also be present.. There are nearly 
700 processed food manufacturing enterprises in the country including homemade processing 
units, of which, at least 30 enterprises are processing fruits and vegetables. These include 
processing of bakery, confectionery, fruits and vegetables, cereals, dairy, carbonated and 
noncarbonated fruit juices, drinks, other beverages and various other food items. These industries 
are not only source of opportunity; there is a big concern on treatment of their effluent. In this 
connection, a Microbial fuel cell (MFC) is a promising technology to address energy crisis 
through waste water treatment. It is a bioreactor that converts chemical energy in the chemical 
bonds in organic compounds to electrical energy through catalytic reactions of microorganisms 
under anaerobic conditions (Allen et al., 1993).The real interest in MFCs has tremendously 
grown in recent years, both in terms of number of researchers as well as the applications for these 
systems (Pant et al.,2009). In the present study, food processing industry wastewater has been 
used as substrate; anaerobic sludge was used for inoculation and potassium permanganate 
solution as oxidant. Different experiments have been done to find the optimum condition for 
current generation and COD removal. Polarization experiments were conducted to find the 
maximum power density. 
 
 
2. Materials and Methods 
 
2.1 Chemicals Used in the Experiments 
 
Information about used chemicals in the experiment can be found in the table below 
 
Table 1 Chemical Used in the Experiments 
 
Sl. No. Name Manufacturer 
1 Potassium Permanganate MERCK KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany 
2 Ammonium iron (II) sulfate hexahydrate (crystal extra pure) MERCK KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany 
3. Silver sulfate (GR for analysis) MERCK KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany 
4. Mercuric sulfate Techno Pharmchem, Bahadurgarh, India 
5. Concentrated Sulfuric acid MERCK, Germany 
6. Potassium dichromate Pure E. Marck (India) Ltd., Mumbai 
7. 
Ferroin solution GR 0.025M  
(1,10 Phenanthroline - ferrous 
sulfate complex solution) 
 
LobaChemie Pvt. Ltd., Mumbai, India 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
369 
 
2.2 Instruments Used in the Experiments 
 
Information about Instruments used in the experiments can be found in the table below 
 
Table 2 Instruments Used in the Experiments 
 
Sl. 
No. Name Model Manufacturer 
1. Digital Multimeter DT9205A SHEN-ZHENXL Electronic Co. Ltd., China 
2. Digital Balance DJ-220A Shinko Denshi Co. Ltd. 
3. UV-vis Spectrophotometer UV-1650 pc Shimadzu Corporation, Japan 
4. Digital pH Meter 3010 pH meter Jenway Ltd., UK 
5. Water/Oil Bath HBR 2 Heidolph 
 
2.3 The Proton Exchange Membrane (Nafion®) 
 
The proton exchange membrane is also known as Polymer Electrolyte Membrane (PEM). The 
electrolyte in a PEM fuel cell is a solid acid supported within the membrane. The solid acid 
electrolyte is saturated with water so that the transport of ions can proceed. The PEM used to 
construct the cells for this thesis work is Nafion®-212. It was manufactured by DuPont, 
Germany. Nafion is a sulfonatedtetrafluoroethylene based fluoropolymer-copolymer discovered 
in the late 1960s by Walther Grot of DuPont(Church et el., 2006).Nafion consists of 
Polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) chains, commonly known as Teflon® forming the backbone of 
the membrane. Attached to the Teflon chains, are side chains ending with sulfonic acid (HSO3) 
groups shown in figure 1. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1 Simplified structure of Nafion® 
370 
 
 
 
 
An interesting feature of this material is that, whereas the long chain molecules are hydrophobic 
(repel water), the sulfonate side chains are highly hydrophylic (attract water). For the membrane 
to conduct ions efficiently the sulphonate side chains must absorb large quantities of water. 
Within these hydrated regions, the hydrogen ions of the sulfonic acid groups can then move 
freely, enabling the membrane to transfer hydrogen ions, in the form of hydronium (H3O+) ions 
from one side of the membrane to the other. PEMs are generally produced in large sheets. The 
electrode catalyst layer is applied to both sides, and is cut to the appropriate size. A single PEM 
sheet is typically between 50 to 175 microns thick, or around the thickness of 2 to 7 sheets of 
paper. 
 
2.4 Analysis of the Oxidant (Potassium Permanganate) 
 
There are a range of substances can be used as a cathodic electron acceptor in MFCs. The most 
popular of them are air (oxygen), pure oxygen, saline water, peroxides, hexacynoferrate etc. In 
this research work potassium permanganate was used as the electron acceptor. Permanganate has 
been used as an environment-friendly oxidant in industries for many years (Oh et al.,2004). Its 
high redox potential offers the possibility of its application in a fuel cell system to establish a 
high potential difference between the anode and the cathode (Liticht et al, 1999).In the study of, it 
was showed that permanganate can be used as an effective cathodic electron acceptor in MFC, 
e.g. five-fold more power density can be achieved in a permanganate two-chamber MFC than 
with other electron acceptors such as hexacynoferrate and oxygen(You et al,2006). 
 
2.5 MFC Construction & Inoculation 
Dual-chambered MFC was designed and fabricated in the laboratory using available local 
material.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 2 Schematic diagram of dual-chambered microbial fuel cell with schematic details 
371 
 
Total volume of both anode and cathode compartment was the same (0.5 L) and each chamber 
was provided with sample port, wire point inputs (top), inlet and outlet ports. 
   A Proton Exchange Membrane (PEM) membrane between two straight conduits was used to 
connect the two chambers. Two 1 cm long and 0.75 cm diameter plastic tubes were used for this 
purpose.Food processing industry wastewater was collected from Cherry Food Processing 
Industry, BISIC Industrial Area, Khadim Nagar, Sylhet. This wastewater was used as substrate in 
the anodic chamber of the MFC. Sludge was collected from Drainage system of Surma 
Residential Area. This substrate and sludge was stored separately in anaerobic condition. This 
mixture was used as the original anodic inoculums. Before inoculation, the sludge was filtered 
through a sieve of 0.25 mm pore size to remove the impurities. The cells were operated in batch 
mode at room temperature (28 ± 2°C) and at dark environment. 
 
2.6 MFC Operations 
The performance of MFC was investigated by a series of experiments.Several experiments were 
conducted to find out the characteristics of the collected sample wastewater. The results can be 
summed up as pH: 3.1, phosphate content: 6785mg/L, Sulphate content: 1105mg/L Nitrate: 
15mg/L glucose: 7.2g/L TSS: 453mg/L and TDS: 22mg/L.  Then experiment was conducted to 
explore the effect of sludge loading in MFC on electricity generation. To do so, MFCs were 
operated with 1gm, 3gm, 6gm and 9gm of sludge and one without sludge at the anode chambers. 
The change in pH, voltage change with time was noted. The subsequent experiments were 
conducted to scrutinize the effect of operating pH. In this experiment, we increased anode pH by 
using NaOH. Three cells containing different influent pH of 7, 8 and 9 were operated 
simultaneously. For each cell, 9gm of sludge was used to inoculate the anode chamber containing 
350 ml of waste water, 200ppm KMnO4   was used in cathode at room temperature. As like the 
earlier experiments, electricity generation and voltage generation both in closed and open circuit 
were monitored. Polarization and power density curves were used to obtain the maximum power 
density by varying the external resistance using a resistor box. Voltage vs. current density and 
power density vs. current density data, % COD removal, and effect of buffering were recorded at 
specified conditions which are demonstrated in result and discussion section. Every experiment 
was conducted at least in duplicate at constant room temperature (28 ± 2 oC) and the average 
value was reported for all the data. 
 
 
3. Analysis and Calculations 
 
3.1 Current density 
 
Current was recorded with a fixed resistance by a precise digital multimeter. Then the current 
density (J, A/m2) was calculated by the following equation (1).  
 
    J = I/A                                                           (1)  
 
Here, I= current and A= Projected cross sectional area of anode 
 
 
 
372 
 
3.2 Power Density 
 
The voltage difference (V) between two points of a resistor connected with the anode & cathode 
was recorded using a precise multi-meter. Power density (P, W/m2) was calculated according to 
the following equation (2). 
 
   P = IV/A                                                        (2) 
 
 Where, I= current, V= voltage difference and A= projected cross-sectional area of the anode. 
 
3.3 COD Removal Calculation 
 
COD removal was calculated by the equation given below: 
% Removal of COD = (A-B)/A x 100 
Here, A is the initial COD of a solution and B is the observed COD of the same solution at a 
certain time. 
 
 
4. Results and Discussion 
 
4.1 Effect of sludge loading in MFC  
 
To scrutinize the effect of sludge loading in MFCs, two cells having fixed amount of wastewater 
sample in the anode chamber of each were operated. First cell was inoculated with 1gm of sludge 
and the other was operated without sludge.The oxidant used in these cells was KMnO4 and the 
concentration of the oxidant was kept constant at 200mg/L. This experiment was conducted in 
closed circuit and the cells were connected with external resistance of 1k. 
 
 
 
Figure 3 Comparison between MFCs running with sludge and without sludge 
 
The graph illustrates that, the cell using sludge at the anode chamber showed better current 
production and reached to a peak value of 5.8µA at 19th hour of operation. The current production 
373 
 
in both cells increased initially and after a bit unsteady performance, reached decline phase. 
Sludge loading favors complex reactions, like hydrolysis, acidogenesis, electro-genesis and 
causes higher electricity generation undergone by micro-organisms. (Behera et al, 2009). Initial 
feed pH could be a cause of poor performance as unfavorable condition retards bacterial 
growth.As incorporation of sludge gives better performance, three more MFCs were operated 
with 3gm, 6gm and 9gm of sludge at the anode chambers respectively. The experimental result 
reveals that increasing sludge loading at anode chamber increases electricity generation. The cell 
operated by 9gm sludge provides better electricity production than the others and the cell 
operated without sludge gives least production of electricity. Initial electricity generations were 
28,27,20,4,3 µA in 9, 6,3,1,0 gm sludge containing cells respectively. Increment of sludge 
loading causes increment of bacterial population which favors electricity generation. This 
supports result found by (Behera et al, 2009). 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4 Effect of variable sludge loading in electricity generation 
 
4.2 Effect of operating pH 
Food processing industry wastewater is acidic in nature and neutralization of the wastewater is 
necessary for biological treatment. Higher acidity or alkalinity of wastewater affects both 
wastewater treatment efficiency and the environment inside the reactor. The pH of wastewater 
needs to be maintained near neutral to protect micro- organisms to favor biological treatment 
processes. For acidic or alkaline industrial wastewaters, the pH is corrected to near neutral by 
suitable alkali or acid addition before biological treatment. The capacity of the anaerobic reactors 
to handle the loading rates depends on the feed pH and the alkalinity generating capability of the 
wastewater to counteract the changes in pH. Therefore, in this study the performance of MFC 
was evaluated under different anodic pH. 
374 
 
 
 
Figure 5 Effect of feed pH in electricity generation 
FromFigure 5, the experimental results clearly demonstrate that the MFC performance is 
dependent on the anodic pH. The possible reason for higher current generation at pH 8.0 might be 
attributed to the effective extracellular electron transfer at this pH microenvironment, where 
electrogenic bacterial growth was favored (Jiang et al.,2009).As feed pH was not constant in none 
of anode chamber, electricity also decreased sharply over time. 
4.3 Polarization and Power Curve 
The polarization curve characterizes the cell voltage as a function of current. The current, in turn, 
depends on the size of the electrical load placed across the fuel cell. In essence the polarization 
curve shows the electrochemical efficiency of the fuel cell at any operating current. 
4.3.1 Polarization & Power Curve for variable sludge loading 
 
Figure 6 Polarization curve for three MFCs using variable sludge loading 
375 
 
 
Figure 7 Power density vs. current density curve for three MFCs using variable sludge loading 
From theFigure 6, it is observed that, when the current density of the cells increased, the cell 
potential decreased. It can be also seen that, potential energy increased when higher amount of 
sludge was loaded. It can be explained as, because of the enhanced microbial population prevails 
at the presence of larger amount of sludge in anode chamber. The maximum potential was 
recorded 308mV at the cell containing 9gm of sludge.  
Figure 7, shows the power density curve as a function of current density. Power densities were 
measured at variable external resistances. Current generation in different resistors was observed 
once the maximum voltage was attained, maximum power density was recorded 0.97mW/m2 at 
the current density 5.6mA/m2 for the cell containing9gm of sludge at the anode chamber.  
At first, the power densities showed an incremental trend with increasing external resistance. But 
after reaching a peak value, the power densities begin to fall down with increasing resistance and 
current density. Current generation showed decreasing trend with increase in resistance and is 
consistent with the reported literature(Venkantaet el., 2006), which indicated a typical fuel cell 
behavior. At higher resistance used, relatively less power density was observed. Relatively less 
voltage drop was observed at lower resistance indicating less potential drop. Voltage stabilization 
was comparatively rapid at higher resistances studied. Effective electron discharge observed at 
lower resistances might be the probable reason for further potential drop and slow stabilization of 
the voltage at lower resistances. Oxidation of substrates by microbes was observed to be more at 
lower resistance than at higher resistance, where microbes donated electrons to the anode as the 
electrons were discharged in a closed circuitcompared the current generation potentiality of 
different substrate and source inoculums(Pant et al., 2009). The power produced reported in our 
study is relatively moderate comparing to other researchers working with same substrate. 
Relatively lower power observed in this study might be because of using graphite electrode 
without any coating. 
 
376 
 
4.3.2 Polarization & Power Curve for different feed pH  
 
Figure 8 Polarization curve for three MFCs using different feed pH 
 
Figure 9 Powerdensity vs. current density curvefor three MFCs using different feed pH 
Higher current density, voltage generation and power density was observed at feed pH 8 
compared to others. Potential favor on biofilm generation at optimum pH is likely to be the 
reason. (Behera et al, 2009).The cell potential decreased with the increment of current density. It 
can be seen that, maximum 587mv was achieved at current density 25mA/m2at feed pH 8.The 
utmost power density was achieved 7.4mW/m2 with current density 25mA/m2 at feed pH 8. 
377 
 
4.4 Removal of COD in Anode Chamber  
It has been reported that microorganisms can convert organic matter into electricity using MFCs 
while simultaneously accomplishing wastewater treatment (Liu et al., 2005) 
 
 
Figure 10 %COD removal of three MFCs containing 3, 6, 9 gm of sludge 
 
In 64 hours of operation, the cells showed a COD removal efficiency of 30.73%, 44.56% and 
55.13% for the cells containing 3, 6, 9 gm of sludge at anode chambers respectively. 
 
 
Figure 11 %COD removal of three MFCs having different feed pH 
The cells showed a COD removal efficiency of 64.51%, 77.71% and 55.54% for the cells 
containing having feed pH 7, 8, 9 at anode chambers over 52 hours of operation respectively. So, 
the removal of COD is found to be higher for the cell which showed higher current production 
especially at optimum pH. This result is expected, because higher current production means 
higher utilization of the organic substrate in the anode chamber. 
378 
 
5. Conclusion 
 
Dual chamber Microbial Fuel cell was fabricated and constructed with local materials. Food 
processing industry wastewater is used as substrate. Effect of sludge loading is investigated and 
found that, current generation of a MFC increases for a given concentration substrate with the 
increment of sludge. The effect of anode feed pH was explored. At optimum pH, higher current 
was produced. Polarization and power curves were plotted for particular sets of MFCs. Due to the 
ohmic resistances; sharp drop in the voltage was observed with the increase of the current 
density. The removal of COD is found to be higher for the cell which showed higher current 
density at optimum pH. 
 
 
References 
 Allen R. M.,Bennetto, H. P.(1993) Microbial fuel-cells electricity production from 
carbohydrates. Appl. Biochem. Biotechnol.,39,27-40. 
Behera,M.  . GhangrekarM.M,(2009)  Performanceo f microbial fuel cell in response to change 
in sludge loading rate at different anodic feed pH, Bioresource. Technol. 100 5114 – 5121 
Clair N. Sawyer, Perry L. McCarty, Gene F. Parkin (2003). Chemistry for Environmental 
Engineering and Science (5th ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill. ISBN 0-07-248066-1. 
Church, Steven,(2006),"Del. firm installs fuel cell", The News Journal, p. B7. 
Jiang,J.; Zhao,Q.; Zhang j., Hang,G.Z; Lee,D.J. ( 2009)Electricity generation from bio-treatment 
of sewage sludge with microbial fuel cell, Bioresour.Technol. 1005808–5812. 
Licht, S., (1999). Electrochem. Commun. 1 p.33–3. 
Liu, H., Cheng, S. and Logan, B. E.,(2005) Production of electricity from acetate or butyrate         
using a single-chamber microbial fuel cell. Environ. Sci. Technol., , (39), pp-658–662. 
Oh, S.E., Min, B., Logan, B.E.,( 2004). Environ. Sci. Technol. 38 (2004) 4900–4904. 
Pant, D., (2009) A review of the substrates in microbial fuel cells (MFCs) for sustainable energy 
production. Bioresour. Technol., doi:10.1016/j.biortech.2009.10.017 
Venkanta Mohan, S., Saravanan, R., Veer Raghavulu, S., Mohanakrishna, G. and Sarma, P. 
N.,(2006) 
Bioelectricity production from wastewater treatment in dual chambered microbial fuel cell 
(MFC) using selectively enriched mixed microflora: Effect of catholyte. Bioresour. Technol., 
doi: 10-1016/j.biotech.12.026. 
You S., Zhao Q., Zhang J., Jiang J., Zhao S.,( 2006). A microbial fuel cell using permanganate as 
the cathodic electron acceptor. Journal of Power Sources 162 (2006) 1409–14.
379 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
ARSENIC REMOVAL USING MODIFIED CERAMIC FILTER IN RURAL 
BANGLADESH: A FIELD STUDY 
 
 
Kumar Fagun Mallick1, Quazi Hamidul Bari2, Khondoker Mahbub Hassan3, Jun Nakajima4, Md. 
Selim Reza5 and Jewel Kumar Golder6 
 
 
ABSTRACT: The objective of this study was to modify a low-cost ceramic filter for arsenic 
removal from groundwater and to evaluate its performance at the field level in arsenic 
contaminated areas. The modified treatment unit was composed of a ceramic filter, iron-mesh and 
clay pot. The filter unit removes arsenic through adsorption and co-precipitation onto iron 
hydroxide solid phase. Two filters (household-type) were provided in two families at the arsenic 
contaminated area, Mollarhat upazilla of Bagerhat district. The observation period was from 
20/08/08 to 09/03/09. Among two filters, the one which was maintained well by the beneficiaries, 
the removal efficiency of arsenic was found to be around 83.33%. For the other filter, the removal 
efficiency was 66%. Also the removal efficiency of iron for each filter was almost 100%. The 
maximum and minimum flow rates for these filters were 2.6 L/hr and 0.52 L/hr, respectively. 
Continuous cleaning after every 30 days caused to get good filtration rate and removal efficiency. 
The cost of the treatment unit was approximately 150 to 200 BDT only and the maintenance was 
very easy and economic. Therefore, the filter unit may be used in various rural areas of arsenic 
contaminated districts in Bangladesh.  
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Arsenic contamination has become a serious threat to public health challenge almost all over the 
world and is considered to be one of the greatest current environmental disasters in Southeast 
Asia, especially in Bangladesh and India. Over 70 million people in Bangladesh and other 
regions of the Indian subcontinent are routinely exposed to arsenic poisoning through drinking 
water (Dhar et. al, 1997). 
Groundwater is the main source of drinking water in Bangladesh. About 97% of the total rural 
population uses the tube well for drinking purpose. But, unfortunately, in recent years, high level 
                                                        
1M.Sc. in Civil Engineering, Department of Civil Engineering, KUET, Khulna. fagunce_04@yahoo.com 
2Professor, Department of Civil Engineering, KUET, Khulna. qhbari@yahoo.com 
3Professor, Department of Civil Engineering, KUET, Khulna. khmhassan@yahoo.com 
4Professor,Department of Environmental Systems Engineering, Ritsumeikan University, Nojihigashi 1-1-1, 
Kusatsu, Shiga, 525-8577, Japan. jnakajim@nisiq.net 
5M.Sc. in Civil Engineering, Department of Civil Engineering, KUET, Khulna. rezaselim30@yahoo.com 
6M.Sc. in Civil Engineering, Department of Civil Engineering, KUET, Khulna. jewelgolder@yahoo.com 
 
 
380 
 
of arsenic in groundwater of shallow aquifers has been found in many districts of Bangladesh 
(Bari et. al, 2005). 
Ingestion of inorganic arsenic can result in both cancer (skin, lung and urinary bladder) and non-
cancer effects (Smith et. al, 1998; Mazumder et. al, 1998). Arsenic present in the groundwater is 
mainly in inorganic forms, namely arsenate (As (V)) and arsenite (As (III)). As (V) is the 
predominant species under atmospheric or more oxidizing environment in the pH range of 6-9. It 
exists predominantly as oxyanions, namely, H2AsO4- or H2AsO42-. As (III) is thermodynamically 
stable and exists predominantly as H3AsO3 or HAsO2 under mildly reducing conditions. As (III) 
is the most common species in anaerobic groundwater (Harvey et. al, 2002) and is generally 
removed less efficiently than the oxidized As (V) (Dixit and Hering, 2003), and is more toxic 
than As (V) (Pontius et. al, 1994). Arsenic release from subsurface minerals and sediments are the 
main cause of groundwater arsenic contamination (Chowdhury et. al, 2000). 
Numerous technologies have been developed to remove arsenic from water. These technologies 
include ion exchange, activated alumina, reverse osmosis, modified coagulation/filtration, 
modified lime softening, electro dialysis reversal and oxidation/filtration. Most arsenic removal 
technologies are effective in removing the pentavalent form of arsenic (arsenate), since the 
trivalent form (arsenite) is predominantly non-charged below pH 9.2. Adsorption and subsequent 
co-precipitation of As with Fe (III) salts is the simplest and convincible arsenic removal 
technique (Katsoyiannis and Zouboulis, 2002; Thirunavukkarasu et. al, 2003; Zeng, 2003). 
With the collaboration program between Ritsumeikan University, Japan and Khulna University of 
Engineering and Technology, Khulna, Bangladesh, a filter unit is invented. The aim of this filter 
is to be used in rural areas of Bangladesh to remove or to reduce Arsenic, as well as Iron below 
allowable value (Arsenic 50 ppb for Bangladesh). The purpose of this study was to evaluate the 
performance of this filter in the field level of arsenic contaminated area in Bangladesh. 
 
 
2. Methodology 
 
The main components of the filter are: Ceramic filter, Iron net, Iron bacteria sludge, Reactor (14 
to 16 L Clay pot was used), Effluent storage bucket, Wooden stand etc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Components of Filter Unit 
381 
 
2.1. Manufacturing of Ceramic Filter 
 
The filter was made with locally available and cheap materials as rice bran, clay soil and water. 
 Oven-dry soil was grind with hammer. Then soil and rice bran was screened through 0.5 
mm and 1 mm sieve respectively. Soil (640g for 1 filter) and rice bran (160g for 1 filter) 
was taken in ratio of 80:20. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2: Sieve analysis of soil and rice bran 
 
 Soil and rice bran was mixed homogeneously with water to make dough. Then dough 
was placed around the bar of the dice and two pieces of PVC pipe were pushed by hand 
from both sides to make cylindrical shape. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3: Mixing of soil and rice bran and making of dough with water 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4: Shaping of filter from dough using dice 
382 
 
 Next the pipes were taken off and the surface of the filter was polished with water. The 
total frame was then toppled down to remove the dice. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5: Final step to get raw ceramic filter 
 
 The resulting cylindrical ceramic filters were hollow with one side open. This soft filter 
was then dried in the sun for at least 3 days. 
 The air dried filters were burnt in potter kiln at 900 to 1000℃. After continuous burning 
for 6 to 8 hours, the kiln was kept to cool down. After some hours the filters were taken 
out from the kiln. The final ceramic filters had a height of 10 cm and a thickness of 2 cm. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6: Final ceramic filter before burning 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7: Filter burning in Potter kiln 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8: Final ceramic filter after burning 
383 
 
2.2. Preparation of Iron Net 
 
600 gm commercially available iron net without coating was taken and 11cm×11cm×11cm cube 
with one side open by the iron net was made. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9: Iron net cube from locally available iron net 
 
2.3. Preparation of Iron Sludge 
 
Water was filled in a big drum of capacity 100 L. Some iron net, iron bar and other iron materials 
was added in the drum. This was aerated with a stick for 5 minutes daily. Iron bacteria layer will 
be deposited at the bottom of the drum after 10-15 days. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10: Iron bacteria culturing and collected iron bacteria sludge 
 
2.4. Arsenic Removal Mechanism 
 
This removal of arsenic occurred due to the oxidation of iron and arsenic followed by their 
subsequent adsorption and precipitation on and with biologically produced iron hydroxides. 
Biological oxidation of iron by iron bacteria is the main mechanism in respect to the removal of 
arsenic in this study. 
Both forms of inorganic arsenic (AS (III) and As (V)) could be removed more efficiently during 
iron oxidation than formed iron precipitation. This might be because a very fine iron hydroxide 
floc is produced which had the high adsorptive surface area and high binding energy resulting in 
the effective removal of both forms of arsenic at the beginning of biological iron oxidation. 
Firstly Fe (II) oxidation is catalyzed by the iron bacteria and transformed to Fe (III). Secondly a 
part of As (III) is oxidized to As (V) in the presence of Fe (II) and the iron bacteria. Finally 
384 
 
adsorption of As (V) on iron hydroxides occurred. These processes are schematically shown in 
Figure 11. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11: Mechanism of arsenic removal by iron oxidation 
 
 
3. Results and Discussion 
 
3.1. Removal performance of arsenic 
 
Average arsenic removal efficiency for 2 filter units were 78.49% and 79.15%. 
 
Table 1 Influent and effluent arsenic characteristics of filter unit 1 
 
Sl. no. of 
sampling 
Influent 
(μg/L) 
Effluent 
(μg/L) 
Removal 
efficiency (%) 
1 210 80 61.90 
2 230 45 80.43 
3 200 45 77.50 
4 240 30 87.5 
5 235 35 85.11 
385 
 
Table 2 Influent and effluent arsenic characteristics of filter unit 2 
 
Sl. no. of 
sampling 
Influent 
(μg/L) 
Effluent 
(μg/L) 
Removal 
efficiency (%) 
1 220 80 63.64 
2 210 45 78.57 
3 180 35 80.56 
4 230 30 86.96 
5 250 35 86.00 
 
The influent and effluent arsenic characteristics are presented graphically in the following figures 
(Figure 12 and Figure 13). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 12 Arsenic removal characteristics of filter unit 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 13 Arsenic removal characteristics of filter unit 2 
 
3.2. Removal performance of iron 
 
The influent water contained very high amount of iron. The average Fe (2+) concentration in 
influent was 8.5 mg/L and 9 mg/L for two filter unit. Our proposed filter unit system was very 
386 
 
much effective in reducing Fe (2+) concentration level and effluent samples contained zero level 
of iron. 
 
3.3. Other characteristics 
 
pH and Dissolved Oxygen (DO) characteristics for influent and effluent samples may be 
expressed as- 
 
Table 3 Influent and effluent characteristics of filter unit 1 
 
pH Dissolved Oxygen Sl. no. of 
sampling Influent Effluent Influent 
(mg/L) 
Effluent 
(mg/L) 
1 6.86 7.90 2.86 3.09 
2 7.28 8.11 3.11 3.29 
3 7.40 7.16 3.28 3.55 
4 7.37 7.87 3.33 3.45 
5 6.66 7.20 3.12 3.31 
 
Table 4 Influent and effluent characteristics of filter unit 2 
 
pH Dissolved Oxygen Sl. no. of 
sampling Influent Effluent Influent 
(mg/L) 
Effluent 
(mg/L) 
1 6.74 7.61 2.74 3.11 
2 7.23 8.20 3.06 3.32 
3 7.20 7.88 3.15 3.27 
4 7.40 7.99 3.13 3.33 
5 6.84 7.35 3.45 3.65 
 
3.4. Economic Aspects 
 
The approximate cost of the filter unit was around 200-250 BDT. Other important point was that 
the unit was reusable. After six months of regular using with cleaning in every month, the filter 
core can be replaced by new one and the total filter unit can be started using again. 
 
 
4. Conclusions 
 
The main findings of the study may be drawn as follows: 
 Arsenic and iron was removed from groundwater (satisfied the Bangladesh standards in 
most cases) with no additional chemicals in the treatment unit. 
387 
 
 The treatment unit was low-cost and easily affordable. 
 This unit was easy to maintain and could be used in arsenic and iron contaminated rural 
areas. 
 
 
Acknowledgement 
 
The research and monitoring woks were supported by Ritsumeikan University, Japan and Khulna 
University of Engineering and Technology, Bangladesh. 
 
 
References 
 
Bari Q.H., Hassn K.M. and Hossain M.F., Development of a low-cost and sustainable arsenic 
removal unit for the rural community in Bangladesh, 2009, The Proceedings of International 
Symposium on Southeast Asian Water Environment, Bangkok, Thailand, Vol. 7: 1-6 
Chowdhury U K, Biswas B K, Chowdhury R T, Samanta G, Mandal B K, Basu G C, Chanda CR, 
Lodh D, Saha K C, Mukherjee S K, Roy S, Kabir S, Quamruzzaman Q, Chakraborti D, 2000, 
Groundwater arsenic contamination in Bangladesh and West Bengal India. Environ Health Presp, 
108: 393–397 
Dhar R K, Biswas B K, Samanta G, Mandal B K, Chakraborti D, Roy S, Jafar A, Islam A, Ara G, 
Kabir S, Khan A W, Ahmed S A, Hadi S A, 1997, Groundwater arsenic calamity in Bangladesh. 
Curr  Sci, 73: 48–58 
Dixit S, Hering J G, 2003, Comparison of arsenic (V) and arsenic (III) sorption onto iron oxides 
minerals: Implications for arsenic mobility. Environ Sci Technol, 37: 4182-4189 
Harvey, C.F., Swartz, C.H., Badruzzaman, A.B.M., Blute, N.K., Yu, W., Ali, M.A., Jay, J., Bickie, 
R., Niedan, V., Barbander, D., Oates, P.M., Ashfaque, K.N., Islam, S., Hemond, H.F., Ahmed, 
M.F., 2002, Arsenic mobility and groundwater extraction in Bangladesh. Science 298, 1602-1606 
Katsoyiannis, I.A., Zouboulis A.I., 2002, Removal of arsenic from contaminated water sources by 
sorption on to iron-oxide-coated polymeric materials. Water Res. 36, 5141-5155 
Mazumder, D.N.G., Haque, R., Ghosh, N., De, B.K., Santra, A., Chakraborti, D., Smith, A.H., 
1998, Arsenic levels in drinking water and the prevalence of skin lesions in West Bengal India. 
Int. J. Epidemiol. 27, 871-877 
Pontius, F.W., Brown, G.K., Chien, J.C., 1994, Health implications of arsenic in drinking water. J. 
Am. Water Works Assoc. 86 (9), 52-63 
Smith, A.H., Goycolea, M., Haque, R., Biggs, M.L., 1998, Marked increase in bladder and lung 
cancer mortality in a region of northern Chile due to arsenic in drinking water. Am. J. Epidemiol. 
147, 660-669. 
Thirunavukkarasu, O.S., Viraraghavan, T., Subramanian, K.S., 2003, Arsenic removal from 
drinking water using granular ferric hydroxide. Water SA. 29, 161-170 
Zeng, L., 2003, A method for preparing silica-containing iron (III) oxide adsorbents for arsenic 
removal. Water Res. 37, 4351-4358. 
388 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
MONITORING OF A LOW COST CERAMIC MEMBRANE BIO-REACTOR BY 
OBSERVING THE PHYSICAL PARAMETERS FOR WASTEWATER TREATMENT 
 
 
Jewel Kumar Golder1, Quazi Hamidul Bari2, Md. Mahmudul Hasan3, Kumar Fagun Mallick4 
and Md. Selim Reza5 
 
 
ABSTRACT: Water is an essential resource for life. It has become more essential in various 
fields in today’s development-oriented world. There is very few wastewater treatment and reuse 
facilities in developing countries due to high costs of treatment processes, lack of awareness, 
shorten of effective environmental pollution control laws or law enforcement. Therefore an 
attempt has been undertaken in this research to evaluate the applicability of Ceramic Membrane 
Bio-Reactor with real wastewater treatment by observing the physical parameters like pH, Color, 
Turbidity, Total Solids, Total Dissolve Solids, Suspended Solids and Flow rate. The average 
Turbidity Removal efficiency of all Reactors was 95.34%. It is worth to state that an excellent 
performance for Turbidity removal was observed for all Runs. Color reduced significantly by 
CMBR. The average influent Color was 2293 Pt-Co and the average effluent color of all Reactors 
was 154.67 Pt-Co. The result emphasized that about 88.45% Color removal was achieved by the 
system. Through the study it was found that the average TS in influent was 3329 mg/l and the 
average effluent TS was 2085 mg/l. Significant Total Solid removal was achieved by CMBR as 
the average Total Solid Removal efficiency was 35.83%. It was also been found that the average 
TDS in influent was 2318 mg/l and the average effluent TDS was 2058 mg/l. The average 
influent SS is 1011 mg/l and the average effluent SS by CMBR was 27.92 mg/l. The average SS 
removal efficiency was 95.25% by CMBR. The run time of CMBR was very good. The longer 
run time of CMBR was 129 days. As the Ceramic Membrane was made by locally available 
materials the technology was inexpensive. Therefore the technology is suitable and can be 
adapted in developing countries for wastewater treatment and reuse. 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
The demand for water is increasing with the increasing industrialization, urbanization and the 
diversification of lifestyles (Kim and Cho 1993). In addition to this, there have been problems 
                                                        
1M.Sc. in Civil Engineering, Department of Civil Engineering, KUET, Khulna. jewelgolder@yahoo.com  
2Professor, Department of Civil Engineering, KUET, Khulna. qhbari@yahoo.com 
3 Department of Environmental Systems Engineering, Ritsumeikan University, Nojihigashi 1-1-1, Kusatsu, 
Shiga, 525-8577, Japan. Mhshimal96@yahoo.com 
4M.Sc. in Civil Engineering, Department of Civil Engineering, KUET, Khulna. fagunce_04@yahoo.com 
5M.Sc. in Civil Engineering, Department of Civil Engineering, KUET, Khulna. rezaselim30@yahoo.com  
 
 
389 
 
relating to the increased amount of wastewater also, since aside from a minor quantity, most 
consumed water is transformed into wastewater. Wastewater is water that has been used and must 
be treated before it is released into another water body, so that it does not cause further pollution 
of water sources (SDWF Report 2007) or any water that is no longer wanted, as no further 
benefits can be derived out of it, is termed as wastewater (Hasan and Nakajima 2010). Generally 
there are four types of wastewater such as Domestic wastewater, Municipal wastewater, Industrial 
wastewater and Storm wastewater. Domestic wastewater can be divided into Black waster and 
Grey water. Generally greywater is divided in four greywater categories based on its origin: 
bathroom, laundry, kitchen and mixed origin (Morel 2005). Greywater includes all household 
wastewater except toilet waste. It can be a valuable water resource, and an increasing number of 
householders are recycling greywater for a variety of purposes. However, care must be taken with 
this practice as it can carry health and environmental risks (Environmental Health Unit Report 
2003). In Bangladesh, the greywater situation in terms of treatment and recycling is the most 
horrible. Most of the people think that greywater is not so much polluted like blackwater and so 
not only rural parts but also in urban area there is no treatment options for greywater. And 
greywater recycling is still unbelievable. Generally different scenarios are prevailed in urban and 
rural areas of Bangladesh about greywater (Hasan and Nakajima 2010). 
   Membrane bioreactor (MBR) technology is characterized as a combination of biological 
wastewater treatment (WWT) and membrane separation, by which biomass can retained in the 
system without conventional gravity sedimentation (Itokawa 2009). The Membrane Bioreactor is 
a simple, but very effective combination of the activated sludge treatment process and the 
membrane filtration process (Operator Notebook Report 2001). The MBR process is an emerging 
advanced wastewater treatment technology that has been successfully applied at an ever 
increasing number of locations around the world (Chapman et al. 2003). Membrane bioreactor 
(MBR) is an improvement of the 100-year old CASP (Conventional Activated Sludge Processes), 
where the traditional secondary clarifier is replaced by a membrane unit for the separation of 
treated water from the mixed solution in the bioreactor (Xing et al. 2000). 
 
 
2. Methodology 
 
The manufacturing process of an innovative, simple and low-cost Ceramic Membrane Bio-
Reactor has been described in this chapter. For making the Ceramic Membrane Bio-Reactor 
cheap, easily and locally available materials (rice bran and clay soil) were chosen for wastewater 
treatment. About 80% clay soil and 20% rice bran was used for manufacture of ceramic 
membrane. Locally collected clay soil samples were dried and grind by hammer. The dried and 
grind clay soil was sieved by 0.5 mm mesh. The rice burn was also dried and sieved by 1 mm 
mesh. Mixing ratio of the ingredients were 80% of clay soil and 20 % of rice bran on weight 
basis. This mixing proportion of the materials was selected by quantifying pore volume, pore size, 
compressive strength and filtration efficiency of several ceramic bars prepared with different 
ratios of the ingredients. Details about the selection of ingredients proportion were described in 
the next section. To make the dough manually, dried ingredients were mixed homogeneously and 
then sufficient amount of water was used. Water of 400-500 ml was used with the dry 
homogeneous-mixed ingredients of 800 gm for making one membrane module. In the end, a 
hollow cylindrical shape was manually made with the dough as 10 cm height with 10 cm outer 
diameter and 6 cm inner diameter with one side opened (Figure 1). To make preferred shape, a 
wooden dice and PVC pipe of 10cm ht with 10cm outer diameter cut vertically in symmetrical 
390 
 
were used. The membrane was then kept for 24 hrs for natural dry at room temperature, then 
oven dried at 105°C for 24 hrs and finally burnt in a muffle furnace in the laboratory. The 
temperature in muffle furnace was increased from room temperature to 900°C and kept this 
temperature for 2 hrs. After that Temperature was decreased gradually as the firing was 
terminated. After the termination of firing the membrane modules were kept into the kiln for 
overnight and take out from the kiln in next morning. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1 a) Dimension of Ceramic Membrane b) Ceramic Membrane after burn 
 
2.1 Experimental Set Up 
 
For this research study 3 numbers of lab-scale Ceramic Membrane Bio-Reactors (CMBRs) were 
set up as named R-1, R-2, and R-3. All the three Reactors were as cylindrical column shaped with 
14 cm inner diameter and made by PVC pipe. The inner diameter of all the Reactors was same as 
14 cm and heights was same as about 140 cm. In each reactor, Membrane Module was directly 
submerged inside the Reactor. The Membrane was placed on a PVC plate and was made water 
tight by using Silica glue to prevent infiltration of water, tilting and floating. The PVC plate with 
Membrane was then placed at the end of PVC pipe. The Bio-Reactors were filled with raw 
wastewater. The wastewater was fed into each Reactor from the feed tank by peristaltic pump. 
The CMBRs were aerated from the beneath of membrane module through a diffuser, so that 
rising air bubbles can provide the membrane surface with more shear stress, which is effective for 
removing attached sludge out of membrane, and to mix the mixed liquor in the Reactor and also 
to maintain an aerobic environment for the normal growth of activated sludge. Intermittent 
aeration system was set up as 4 hr aeration per day by using the blower. The three Reactors R-1, 
R-2 and R-3 were under aerobic condition. Permeate from the Reactors was collected during the 
aeration period through outlet by gravitational pressure. The water was sampled every three days 
per week. The parameters analyzed were the level of Turbidity, Color, TS, TDS, SS, Fe and COD 
in the Bio-Reactor and permeate. Figure 2 shows the schematic view of the system, displays 
photographs of the membrane media position in the Reactor and the CMBR under continuous 
operation in the laboratory. The CMBR systems were monitored by measurement of permeate 
flux, pH and DO. Sludge retention time (SRT) was infinitive as there was no sludge wastage 
except for sampling during the operation. 
   The Run time of Reactor-1, Reactor-2 and Reactor-3 were 215 days. Within this time period 
Reactor-1 and Reactor-2 were clogged after 129 days from 29-12-10 to 04-05-11. Reactor-3 was 
clogged after 65 days and after cleaning it was clogged again at 129 days. A cake layer formation 
391 
 
was found on all Ceramic Membrane surfaces because of the deposition of the floe sludge. It was 
also noticed that large amount of sludge was accumulated with the stand and blocked the bottom 
surface. This might be reduced the filterability of the bottom. The membrane was then cleaned 
physically by removing the accumulated sludge with the help of water, knife and soft spongy 
brush. The result emphasized that membrane pores were not clogged; only cake layer was formed 
upon the membrane surface which was easily removable by physical cleaning. There was no need 
of chemical washing or change of the membrane. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                     
Figure 2 a) Schematic representation of the system     b) CMBR under operation in laboratory 
 
 
3. Results and Discussion 
 
3.1. Operating parameters (DO and pH): 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3 Range of pH in CMBR 
392 
 
From laboratory test it was found that the average DO in influent wastewater was 3.47 mg/l. The 
average effluent DO by Reactor-1, Ractor-2 and Reactor-3 were 5.42 mg/l, 5.42 mg/l and 5.47 
mg/l respectively. The pH value in influent was within the range of 6.68 to 8.80 and the average 
pH value in influent was 7.97. The average pH value in Reactor-1, Reactor-2 and Reactor-3 were 
7.99, 7.92 and 7.91 respectively. The pH of all Reactors was stable within the range of 7-8 as 
shown in Figure 3. 
 
3.2. Turbidity Removal 
 
From laboratory test it was found that average Turbidity in influent was 602.85 NTU with 
minimum and maximum value of 139 NTU and 3930 NTU respectively. After treatment the 
effluent showed very low Turbidity as the average Turbidity of all Reactors was 13.55 NTU. 
Significant Turbidity removal was achieved by CMBR. Turbidity removal efficiency of Reactor-1, 
Reactor-2 and Reactor-3 were 95.31%, 95.49% and 95.21% respectively. The average Turbidity 
Removal efficiency of all Reactors was 95.34%. It is worth to state that an excellent performance 
for Turbidity removal was observed for all Runs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4 Turbidity in Influent and Effluent             Figure 5 Turbidity Removal Efficiency 
 
3.3. Color Removal 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6 Color in Influent and Effluent                  Figure 7 Color Removal Efficiency  
393 
 
From laboratory test it was found that the average Color in influent was 2294 Pt-Co with 
minimum and maximum value of 148 Pt-Co and 8130 Pt-Co respectively.  
Color reduced significantly by CMBR as average effluent Color of Reactor-1, Reactor-2 and 
Reactor-3 among 32 samples were 138.79 Pt-Co, 184.47 Pt-Co and 142.91 Pt-Co respectively. 
Significant Color removal efficiency was achieved by CMBR. Removal efficiency of Reactor-1, 
Reactor-2 and Reactor-3 were 90.10%, 87.48% and 87.78% respectively. The result emphasized 
that about 88.45% Color removal was achieved by the system. 
 
3.4. TS, TDS, SS Removal 
 
The TS, TDS and SS are important concern in the treatment of wastewater. Its disposal causes 
clogging of sewerage system and also its disposal to water bodies have harmful effects to living 
resources. It has been found that the average TS in influent was 3329 mg/l with minimum and 
maximum value of 1790 mg/l and 5189 mg/l, respectively. The Average TS in effluent of 
Reactor-1, Reactor-2 and Reactor-3 were 2040 mg/l, 2094 mg/l and 2123 mg/l, respectively. The 
standard value of TS and TDS for discharging the wastewater into land water, public sewer and 
on irrigated land is 2100 mg/l. The average TS and TDS in effluent of all Reactors were 2085 
mg/l and 2058 mg/l, respectively which are below the standard value. The average value of SS in 
influent was 1011.34 mg/l with minimum and maximum value of 28 mg/l and 3080 mg/l 
respectively. After treatment remarkable SS removal was achieved by CMBR as the average 
effluent SS of Reactor-1, Reactor-2 and Reactor-3 were 22.95 mg/l, 32.79 mg/l and 28.03 mg/l 
respectively. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8 SS in Influent and Effluent               Figure 9 SS removal efficiency by CMBR 
 
TS removal efficiency of Reactor-1, Reactor-2 and Reactor-3 were 37.16%, 35.25% and 35.09% 
respectively and TDS removal efficiency were 12.81%, 9.77% and 9.73% respectively. The data 
also reveals that the SS removal efficiency of Reactor-1, Reactor-2 and Reactor-3 were 95.61%, 
94.59% and 95.56% respectively. The average SS removal efficiency was 95.25% by all Reactors. 
 
3.5. Flux Performance 
 
The fluxes of different Reactors were determined by simple gravitational filtration method. Initial 
fluxes at R-1, R-2 and R-3 Reactor were found 100 ml/min 90 ml/min and 39 ml/min respectively. 
The Run time of Reactor-1 Reactor-2 and Reactor-3 were 242 days from 29-12-10 to 24-08-11. 
394 
 
Within this time period Reactor-1 and Reactor-2 were clogged after 129 days. But Reactor-3 was 
clogged after 65 days and after cleaning it was clogged again at 129 days. A flux detail of all 
Reactors is illustrated in Figure 10. 
   As can be seen, Flux decreased gradually throughout the time period. The Flux of Reactor-1, 
Reactor-2 and Reactor-3 before clogging were 0.5 ml/min, 0.25 ml/min and 0.1ml/min 
respectively. It is noticeable that the membrane was not totally clogged rather its flow rate was 
very low. As blockage of the pores of the membranes by solid particles was removed by cleaning, 
sharp rise of the Flow rate occurred after 65 days and 171 days as shown in Figure10. A sharp 
decrease of the flux can occur due to non uniform air distribution into the membrane tank caused 
the total blockage of the gap between the membranes by solid particles (TS,TDS,SS), leading to 
reduction of the membrane flow capacity.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10 Variation of Flux 
 
Physical cleaning was suitable and adequate for removing the cake layer to reclaim the ceramic 
membrane. Since the pore of the membrane was not clogged, only the sludge accumulation on 
membrane surface was occurred. 
 
 
4. Conclusions 
 
A low cost and simple type ceramic membrane was innovated for concurrent wastewater 
treatment and reuse especially for wastewater treatment in this study. This simple type CMBR 
process was investigated from the laboratory experiments and it can be concluded that: Activated 
sludge can be easily separated through this Technology. Through this process sufficient amount 
of flux was obtained for the case of wastewater treatment. Turbidity removed significantly by 
Ceramic Membrane Bio-Reactor. The average Turbidity Removal efficiency of all Reactors was 
95.34%. It is worth to state that an excellent performance for Turbidity removal was observed for 
all Runs. The result shows that about 88.45% of Color removal was achieved by the system. 
Turbidity and Color removal efficiency was excellent that’s why the filtered water is more 
acceptable by the people as the aesthetic appearance of the water is good. The average SS 
removal efficiency was 95.25% by all Reactors which demonstrates that the removal of SS was 
very efficient by CMBR. The Total Solid removal was not satisfactory by CMBR as the average 
395 
 
Total Solid Removal efficiency was 35.83%. Physical cleaning of the membrane was much 
simple and it was easy to remove the cake layer to reclaim the membrane. The run time of CMBR 
was very good. The longer and maximum run time of CMBR was 129 days.  The quality of 
effluent water was excellent as the effluent water was clear colored and odor- free. It was found 
that high removal efficiency of organic content was obtained that could be made it suitable for 
wastewater reuse. As the Ceramic Membrane was made by locally available materials the 
technology was inexpensive. Therefore the technology is suitable and can be adapted in 
developing countries for wastewater treatment and reuse. The total cost for setup of Ceramic 
Membrane Bio-reactor in the laboratory was about 16500 Taka only. 
 
 
Acknowledgement 
 
The author expresses his praise to Almighty God, who helped to complete paper successfully and 
highly grateful to my friends for their sincere cooperation and providing valuable information.  
 
 
References 
 
Chapman, S., Leslie, G. and Law, I. (2003) Membrane Bioreactors (MBR) for  Municipal 
Wastewater Treatment–An Australian Perspective. A report of CH2M HILL Australia Pty Ltd, 
Australia, pp. 1-11. 
Environmental Health Unit, Report (2003) Greywater recycling: appropriate uses. Victoria, 
Australia, pp.1-2. 
Hasan, M. M. and Nakajima, J. (2010) Development of Low Cost Ceramic Membrane Bioreactor 
for Decentralized Waste water Treatment and Reuse. A thesis for the Degree of Master of 
Engineering, Ritsumeikhan University, Japan, pp. 1-105. 
Itokawa, H. (2009) State of The Art of MBR Technology and Its Perspective in Japan. Research 
and Technology Development Division, Japan Sewage Works Agency (JS), Toda City, Japan, pp. 
1-12. 
Kim, S. and Cho, S. D. (1993) Application of Membrane in Municipal Wastewater Treatment and 
Reuse. Korean Ind. & Eng. Chemistry, Vol. 4, No. 4, pp. 1-2. 
Morel, A. (2005) Greywater treatment on household level in developing countries. Thesis report 
at the Department of Environmental Sciences at the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (ETH) 
and Swiss Federal Institute for Environmental Science and Technology (EAWAG), Zurich, 
Switzerland, pp.15-56. 
Operator Notebook Report (2001) Membrane Bioreactor (MBR) in Wastewater Treatment. New 
York, USA, pp. 1-8. 
SDWF Report (2007) Safe Drinking Water Foundation Report 2007, pp. 1-5. 
Xing, C. H., Tardieu, E., Qian, Y. and Wen, X. H. (2000) Ultrafiltration membrane bioreactor for 
urban wastewater reclamation. Membrane Science, Tsinghua University, China, Vol. 177, pp. 73-
82. 
396 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
DEVELOPMENT OF A MATLAB-BASED TOOL TO EVALUATE THE INTERACTION 
OF TIDAL FLUCTUATION AND GROUNDWATER 
 
 
Bijit Kumar Banik1, Daniela Plath2 and Wilfried Schneider3 
 
 
ABSTRACT: The groundwater in coastal region has got immense attention by different 
researchers through mainly emphasizing on the dynamic interaction between groundwater and 
seawater since last 60 years.  Due to the increase in development in coastal regions, it is 
important to ensure proper coastal management and coastal protection techniques in order to 
avoid various coastal hydro-geological, engineering, and environmental problems such as 
seawater intrusion, stability of coastal engineering structures, beach dewatering for construction 
purposes, and deterioration of the marine environment. A MATLAB-based software was built in 
order to analyze the interaction of ground water and surface water based on analytical solutions 
suggested by Li et. al. (2007). The main feature of the software is that it can process the data 
which can be fitted either automatically or manually and once the fitting is complete, along with 
insertion of some other basic data, the program will give different outputs like Hydraulic 
conductivity, Transmissibility, Specific storage, different types of Velocity, Amplitude and 
different types of Flow Volume depending on the user's demand.  
 
Keywords: Aquifers, Analytical solution, TIDAL, Groundwater, Hydraulics, MATLAB.   
 
 
1. Intruduction 
 
Since the 1950s, the groundwater in coastal region has got immense importance by different 
researchers through mainly emphasizing on the dynamic interaction between groundwater and 
seawater. In most coastal areas, groundwater and seawater are in constant communication 
because of tidal fluctuations. Various coastal hydrological, engineering, and environmental 
problems ultimately leads to inaugurate this new field of research. These include coastal aquifer 
parameter estimation, beach dewatering, marine retaining structures, and seawater intrusion [e.g., 
Ferris, 1951; Farrell, 1994; Svitil, 1996]. Different researchers had worked with different 
approaches to reveal the dynamics between groundwater and seawater. Ferris (1951) derived an 
equation to describe the change of groundwater head in a confined aquifer in response to 
sinusoidal oscillations in sea level. This equation has been widely used to estimate aquifer 
                                                        
1 Assistant Professor, CEE Department, SUST, Sylhet, Bangladesh. bijit_sustbd@yahoo.com  
2 Faculty, Institut für Wasserressourcen und Wasserversorgung, Technische Universität Hamburg-Harburg, 
Germany, daniela.petersen@tu-harburg.de 
3 Professor, Institut für Wasserressourcen und Wasserversorgung, Technische Universität Hamburg-
Harburg, Germany, w.schneider@tu-harburg.de 
397 
 
parameters in coastal areas.  
   Boussinesq equation together with the Dupuit assumption is the base of most of such research 
(Bear, 1972; Dagan, 1967). Most previous investigations for water table fluctuations in coastal 
aquifers have considered the case of a vertical beach instead of the more realistic case of a 
sloping beach for simplification of the problem. Nielsen (1990) was the first to derive an 
analytical solution where the assumption of a fixed location of the shoreline boundary condition 
is relaxed. However, his solution does not give any approximation to the boundary condition 
other than at the intersection of the beach and the ocean. The concept of a moving boundary to 
reexamine the problem using the same perturbation parameter as Nielsen (1990) was introduced 
by Li et al. (2000). The Li et al. (2000) model overcame the inconsistency of the boundary 
condition in Nielsen's (1990) model. However, in both models [Li et al. (2000); Nielsen (1990)], 
the applicability was limited to a certain range of beach slope which was included in the 
perturbation parameter. In addition, both models only provided incomplete Solutions of the 
second harmonic oscillations. All those solutions are the zeroth-order boundary value problem 
(i.e., the Boussinesq equation) that has been solved for a sloping beach. A higher-order solution 
for the tide-induced water table fluctuations in coastal aquifers adjacent to a sloping beach using 
a perturbation technique was introduced by Teo et al (2003).  
   Van der Kamp (1973) studied a three layered coastal aquifer system consisting of one aquifer 
bounded by two semi permeable layers from up and down. Jiao and Tang (1999) considered the 
groundwater head fluctuations in the confined aquifer of a coastal multi-layered groundwater 
system consisting of a confined aquifer, an unconfined aquifer, and a leaky layer between them. 
They ignored the leaky layer’s elastic storage and tide-induced water table variations in the 
unconfined aquifer. Li and Jiao (2001) improved the result of Jiao and Tang (1999) by taking the 
leaky layer’s elastic storage into account. Li et al. (2001) used a perturbation method to 
investigate the tidal wave interference between the unconfined and confined aquifers, but they 
ignored the effects of the elastic storage of the leaky layer. Jeng et al. (2002) presented a 
complete analytical solution to describe the tidal wave propagation and interference in the 
unconfined and confined aquifers separated by a thin, no-storativity leaky layer.  
   Li et al. (2007) had incorporated the submarine outlet capping which was neglected in all 
previous studies. He showed that when the offshore confined aquifer is short, the inland head 
fluctuation increases with the outlet capping’s leakance. In this case significant negative phase 
shift occurs if the leakance is small. For offshore aquifer length greater than a threshold value the 
inland head fluctuations are independent of this length and the outlet capping’s leakance (Li et al. 
(2007)).  
 
2. Theory 
 
2.1 Analytical solution used 
 
This analytical model was suggested by Li et al. (2007). Li considered a coastal confined aquifer 
with an impermeable roof that extends under the sea for a distance L. The aquifer’s submarine 
outlet is covered by a thin layer of sediment with different permeability (outlet capping, see 
Figure 1). Assume that the aquifer is horizontal, homogeneous and of uniform thickness, and that 
the change of water storage in the outlet capping can be neglected. The flow in the confined 
aquifer is horizontal and follows Darcy’s law. 
   Let the x axis be perpendicular to the coastline, horizontal and positive landward, and the 
intersection with the coastline be the origin of the axis (see Figure 1). On the basis of the above 
398 
 
assumptions the following governing equations can be used to describe the head fluctuation 
within the confined aquifer [van der Kamp, 1972]:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1 Cross section of a confined aquifer extending under the sea with a thin outlet capping. 
 
In the offshore aquifer 








 txL
t
hLS
x
hK
t
hS sess ,0,2
2
   (1) 
In the inland aquifer 





 tx
x
hK
t
hSs ,0,2
2
     (2) 
where h(x,t), SS and K are the hydraulic head [L], specific storage [L-1] and hydraulic 
conductivity [LT-1] of the confined aquifer, respectively; Le is the loading efficiency 
(dimensionless) of the sea tide; and hs (t) is the sea level [L]. 
   The analytical solution for an aquifer with impermeable outlet capping was given as: 
        0,)2(coscos
2
cos),( 2 





  xLLxateaxtetALtxh Lxa
ax
e   (3) 
   
 
0,
2cos1
2sinarctancos2cos21
2
),( 2
2
42













x
aLe
aLeaxteaLeAeLtxh aL
aL
aLaL
ax
e 
 (4) 
Outlet capping 
Impermeable roof 
Confined 
399 
 
   Equations (3) and (4) can be used not only to describe the tidal fluctuation in a confined 
coastal aquifer with an impermeable outlet capping, but also to describe the head responses of a 
confined aquifer under a tidal river to its water level fluctuation. Assume that the river is straight, 
symmetric with respect to its middle line and has a width of 2L; the aquifer is horizontal and 
separated by an impermeable layer from the river. The tidal flow in the aquifer is one-
dimensional and perpendicular to the river bank (see Figure 1). Because the symmetric boundary 
condition at the river middle line is equivalent to the boundary condition of the impermeable 
outlet capping here, equations (3) and (4) give the head fluctuation in the aquifer under the river 
with x = 0 at the river bank and x = -L at the river middle line (Li et al., 2007). 
The tidal fluctuation can be approximated by the superposition of the semidiurnal (ω1 = 0.235 h-1) 
and diurnal (ω2 = 0.506 h-1) components: 
)cos()cos()( 2,22,1,11, seaseaseaseaseasea tAtAWtH      (5) 
   where, W, A, ω and θ are the mean elevation [L], amplitude [L], frequency [T-1], and the 
phase shift [radian] of the tidal fluctuation, respectively; the subscripts j = 1, 2 represent the 
semidiurnal and diurnal components, respectively. 
   So, on the basis of the superposition principle, 'n' number of tide components of the head 
fluctuation will lead to a solution like below: 
For –L < x < 0 
       











n
j
jSeajj
Lxa
jSeajj
xa
jSeajejSeaGW Lxatexat
etLAWtxh j
j
1
,
2
,,, )2(cos.cos2
cos),(   (6) 
For x > 0 
   
  














n
j
jSea
j
La
j
La
jj
La
j
La
xa
e
jSeaGW
Lae
Lae
xateLaeeLAWtxh
j
j
jj
j
1
,2
2
42
,
2cos1
2sin
arctancos2cos21
2
),(   (7) 
For detailed information please referred to Li et al. (2007).  
 
2.2 Harmonic structure of tidal stresses 
 
Ocean and earth tides, being of solar and lunar origin, are periodic, as are the motions of those 
astronomical bodies relative to the earth. Because these motions are complex and have many 
components of different frequencies and level of influence, the tides also are a combination of 
periodic components of different frequencies and amplitudes. These components are expressed as 
distinct “harmonics,” sinusoidal functions of given amplitude and frequency and phase relation to 
some common time reference. Many of the harmonics that are part of daily tidal oscillations are 
listed in table 1 together with the symbols usually used to refer to them and their associated 
frequencies. These frequencies are known with great precision based on decades of astronomical 
observations (Hanson and Owen, 1982, table 1). The frequencies are common to all ocean and 
earth tide data, but the amplitudes and phase relations for each component are a characteristic of 
each individual set of tide data. Bredehoeft (1967) cites Melchior (1964) in stating that, of all the 
harmonic components, only five (M2, S2, N2, K1, and O1) are of importance geophysically, 
together accounting for approximately 95 percent of the tidal potential. 
400 
 
Table 1 Important harmonic component of tides 
 
Symbol 
 
Angular 
frequency 
(radians/hour) 
 
Frequency 
(cycles/day) 
 
Period 
(hours) 
 
Explanation 
O1  .24335189  .92953574  25.819341  Main lunar diurnal 
K1  .26251618  1.00273794  23.934469  Lunar-solar diurnal 
M2  .50586804  1.93227356  12.420602  Main lunar semidiurnal 
S2  .52359878  2.00000000  12.000000  Main solar semidiurnal 
N2 
 
.49636693  1.89598199  12.658348  Lunar elliptic (lunar semi-diurnal 
component caused by monthly variation in 
moon’s distance) 
P1  .26108260  .99726206  24.065891  Main solar diurnal 
 
2.3 Filtering method used 
 
The periodic rise and fall of tide-water stage in the ocean and hydraulically associated streams 
and tidal marshes in coastal area generate sinusoidal ground-water-level fluctuations in adjoining 
aquifers. Such fluctuations occur when propagating pressure waves, produced by fluctuating 
hydraulic head at submarine outcrops of confined or unconfined aquifers or from loading and 
unloading on confined layers, travel inland from the surface-water body. In unconfined aquifers 
the pressure wave is mostly generated from changes in storage due to dewatering and resaturation 
of pores whereas in confined aquifers it is mostly due to changes in fluid pressure (Serfes, 1991).  
   Mean hydraulic gradient or regional gradient can only ensure the accurate determinations of 
ground-water flow instead of a single set of water-level measurements (Serfes, 1991). Two 
methods are used to effectively filter the diurnal and semidiurnal tides (Godin, 1966). One is 71-
hour mean and the other is 25-hour mean. The later method should only be used when there are 
large differences in mean water levels between wells because the aliasing errors (due to avoiding 
the longer period frequencies, such as lunar monthly or semi-lunar monthly) are then less 
significant while for a higher degree of accuracy the first method should be used. 
 
2.3.1. 71-Hourly Mean 
The filter requires 71 consecutive hourly observations. Using moving averages it yields a filtered 
mean level for the median time of the 71 hours. First, a sequence of means is computed for 24 
observations, starting with observation one for the first mean and observation 48 for the last, 
yielding a total of 48 means. Second, a similar series of means is computed for 24 of those means 
yielding 25 means. Last, the mean of those 25 means is computed yielding the mean level at hour 
36. 
   The method can be mathematically expressed as: 
Let the consecutive hourly water-level values be O(1), O(2), O(3)……….,O(71)  
the first sequence of means (Xi) is 
;48.,..,3,2,1,
24
)(23
0




iwhereiKOX
k
i     (8) 
the second sequence of means (Yi) is 
401 
 
;25.,..,3,2,1,
24
23
0
)( 

 jwhere
X
Y
i
ji
j      (9) 
finally the mean level (M) at hour 36 is 
 


25
1 25j
jYM         (10) 
 
2.4 Hydraulic Parameters 
 
2.4.1. Hydraulic gradients 
For the estimation of ground water velocity, the hydrogeologists often perform the common 
calculation of determining the hydraulic gradient. Very few of the hydrogeological textbooks 
define the hydraulic gradient based on the realistic field examples in which it is calculated. The 
usual examples consist of two to four wells which make the calculations relatively simple . 
However the researches are always in possession of searching the solution of more than four 
wells. Devlin (2003) first introduced a simple and convenient method to determine hydraulic 
gradients of planner water tables, or piezometric surfaces, and horizontal flow regimes from data 
sets involving numerous wells.  
The equation of a plane is 
0 DCzByAx        (11) 
   where, if the plane represents a water table or piezometric surface, x and y are the horizontal 
coordinates defining the location of a well, and z is the water table (or piezometric surface) 
elevation. If the coefficients A, B, C and D for the water table or piezometric surface are known, 
they can be used to calculate the magnitude and direction of the hydraulic gradient by the 
following equations: 
2
22
C
BAgrad          (12) 
A
Barctan         (13) 
Equation (11) has the solution,  
          DXXXA tt 1        (14)  
   where the superscript "t" denotes transpose of the matrix that carries it, and the superscript "-
1" denotes the inverse of the matrix that carries it. Equation (14) is a multiple linear regression 
equation (Snedecor and Cochran, 1989) and is also the equation leading to the least squares fit of 
the model to the data (Hornback, 1975). So, the coefficients A, B, C are the outcome of best fitted 
data. This method is flexible to any range of data set. 
    
402 
 
2.4.2. Velocity 
Tide-induced flow velocity 
Tide-induced flow velocity can be simply calculated from the basic Darcy's formula. It can be 
expressed as: 
dx
txdh
n
k
txv
e
f
Ta
),(),(,         (15) 
where, ),(, txv Ta = Tide-induced flow velocity 
      Kf = Hydraulic conductivity of the aquifer  
        ne = Effective porosity of the aquifer 
   h(x,t) = Tide-induced head fluctuation         
   
For x > 0 
Differentiating equation (7) will give, 
   
 
     
















































jSea
j
La
j
La
jj
La
j
La
jsea
xa
j
jSea
j
La
j
La
jj
La
j
La
jsea
xa
j
e
n
j
Lae
Lae
xateLaeAea
Lae
Lae
xateLaeAea
L
dx
txdh
j
j
jjj
j
j
jjj
,2
2
42
,
,2
2
42
,
1
2cos1
2sin
arctansin(2cos21
2cos1
2sin
arctancos(2cos21
2
),(

 (16) 
Ground flow velocity 
This is simply the ground water flow velocity and can be computed by the following formula: 
i
n
k
txv
e
f
Ga ),(,        (17) 
where, ),(, txv Ga = Ground flow velocity 
     kf = Hydraulic conductivity of the aquifer 
            ne= Effective porosity of the aquifer 
      i = Hydraulic gradient, derived from the method introduced by Devlin (2003) 
   
Tide-induced flow velocity with ground flow (Direction: tide propagation) 
In this case the resultant of ),(, txv Ta and ),(, txv Ga will be measured along the direction of ),(, txv Ta  and can be computed as (see figure 11): 
    cos,,),)(( ,,,,  txvtxvtxTidev GaTaGTa     (18) 
where, ),)((,, txTidev GTa = Tide-induced flow velocity with ground flow (direction of tide 
propagation) 
 
Tide-induced flow velocity with ground flow (Direction: ground flow) 
In this case the resultant of ),(, txv Ta and ),(, txv Ga will be measured along the direction of ),(, txv Ga  and can be computed as (see figure 11): 
403 
 
   txvtxvtxGWv GaTaGTa ,cos,),)(( ,,,,       (19) 
where, ),)((,, txGWv GTa = Tide-induced flow velocity with ground flow (direction of ground 
flow) 
 
Real flow velocity 
This is the actual resultant of both velocity ),(, txv Ta and ),(, txv Ga where the resultant will be 
measured simply by the law of parallelogram principle of force (shown in figure 2). 
 
cos2 ,,
2
,
2
,  TaGaTaGaa vvvvv      (2015) 
where, av = Real flow velocity 
η = Angle between Tav , and Gav ,  
 
                       
Figure 2 Illustration of real flow velocity 
 
2.4.3. Flow volume 
From continuity equation, 
 AvQ f           (21)    
where, Q = flow volume 
 vf = Darcy velocity 
 A = cross-sectional area 
Again, 
eaf nvv          (22) 
Va 
η 
Va,G 
Va,T φ 
North 
η = 1800- φ 
 
404 
 
where, vf = Darcy velocity 
va = Actual velocity 
ne = effective porosity 
So, in the case of tide-induced flow velocity ( ),(, txv Ta ), tide-induced flow volume per length 
of aquifer can be expressed as: 
  GWeTaT WtxhnvQ  ,,       (23) 
where, QT = tide-induced flow volume per length of aquifer 
    Tav , = Tide-induced flow velocity 
      ne = Effective porosity of the aquifer 
   h(x,t) = Tide-induced head fluctuation     
    WGW = mean ground water level (method introduced by Serfes, (1991) 
 
3. The Software TIDAL 
 
The software TIDAL was made by MATLAB-2010b. This is an executable version and is able to run in any 
windows system without having an MATLAB environment. The salient feature of the software is that it can 
load and process data from excel or text format and is able to give the automatic best fit of those data. 
Method introduced by Serfes (1991) was used in calculating the mean water level. For calculating the 
average gradient of the area of analysis Devlin's (2003) method was used. Different outputs like 
Hydraulic conductivity, Transmissibility, Specific storage, Amplitude, different types of Velocity 
(For instance, velocity vs distance (with 8 different time step); velocity vs time) and different 
types of Flow Volume can be obtained.  
  
4. A Case Study 
 
A case study of the river Krückau was done in order to get an impression about the software 
(TIDAL). The river is situated in Schleswig-Holstein, Germany, which flows into the Elbe, one of 
the major rivers of Central Europe. The water level in the river is influenced by the tides near the 
estuary of the river Elbe. The study was not intended to give the exact result but to get an idea 
about the software. The reason behind was, all the necessary information required wasn't 
available to run the software correctly. That is why some parameters were estimated. So, the main 
idea about the analysis is to introduce the software's capability of doing analysis (Banik, 2011).   
   The river-aquifer system can be considered as the system shown in figure 1. Surface water 
(SW) data of 3 consecutive days (in fact a bit more) was available where as two ground water 
observation well (named W124 and W148) data was also available. But some other parameters 
like position, northing, easting, width of river at that point of analysis, porosity, etc were 
estimated.  
   First of all, prior to loading and processing (making 71 hours consecutive data) of surface 
water data, fitting of the surface water data was done. Just before fitting the harmonic 
components of tide were chosen. Conservatively two most influencing tide components M2 and 
K1, which have a tidal period of 12.420602 hours and 23.934469 hours respectively, were 
selected. The automatic fitted curve along with the raw data is shown in figure 3. 
 
405 
 
 
Figure 3 Fitting of SW data of Krückau river 
 
From fitting it is noted that the R2 = 0.76 with mean squared error of 0.04 m2. The mean surface 
water level was calculated according to the method introduces by Serfes (1991) and it was 0.71 m. 
Other four important parameters (two amplitudes (A) and two phase shift (θ)) are also depicted 
on figure 41 which will be needed in the fitting of ground water data.  
   The input parameters for two wells i.e. Northing (m), Easting (m) and Distance from 
shoreline (m) for W124 and W148 was taken as (3552053.204, 5936874 and 20) and 
(3552081.691, 5936884.512 and 27) respectively. Note that as only two wells were considered 
the method of Devlin (2003) wasn't used, instead, the parameters, Direction of ground water base 
flow (βGW = 3200) and Ground water gradient (iGW = 0.035) was inserted manually. Other 
parameters were taken as: Width of the river (40 m), Porosity (0.30), Length of the aquifer (100 
m), Thickness of the aquifer (6.3 m), Direction of shoreline (βSL = 1300), Compressibility of 
matrix (α = 0.00000005 m2/N), Compressibility of matrix (β = 0.0000000005 m2/N), Density of 
water (998.20 kg/m3). 
Once all inputs were loaded, the fitting of two wells were done and shown in figure 4 and figure 
5. 
 
Figure 4 Fitting of well W124   Figure 5 Fitting of well W148 
406 
 
Once fitting was done the software was ready to give various outputs. An estimation of specific 
storage, Hydraulic diffusivity, Hydraulic conductivity and Transmissibility was the first output. 
Some other important outputs are shown in the following figures. 
 
Figure 6 Amplitude decrease 
Figure 7 Tide-Induced flow velocity 
Figure 8 Comparison of different types of velocity 
407 
 
Figure 9 Comparison of real flow velocity with tidal fluctuation for well W124 
 
 
408 
 
5. Conclusions 
 
Tidal dynamics is a fundamental part of coastal hydrology. The pressure of tidal waves causes 
periodic fluctuation of the water table in a coastal aquifer. At present there is some very handy 
numerical software available to analyze those interactions. But due to the fact that those 
numerical software are inconvenient in terms of cost, data required (in order setup a model) and 
some error coming from numerical dispersion, analytical solution is still a handy tool to reveal 
the governing parameters of the system and in some extent to provide benchmarks for the 
numerical solutions. Out of numerous coastal-aquifer systems, one complete system can be 
analyzed by the newly built MATLAB-based software named TIDAL. The analytical solution 
used in the software was based on the research of Li et al. (2007). The objective of this study was 
to develop a MATLAB-based software, which will evaluate the differences in the interaction 
between a tidal water and groundwater. The main feature of the software is that it can process the 
data which can be fitted either automatically or manually and once the fitting is complete, along 
with insertion of some other basic data, the program will give different outputs like Hydraulic 
conductivity, Transmissibility, Specific storage, different types of Velocity, Amplitude and 
different types of Flow Volume depending on the user's demand.  
 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
The  authors  are  acknowledging  Institut für Wasserressourcen und Wasserversorgung, 
Technische Universität Hamburg-Harburg, Germany for all types of assistance. The authors also 
thank all anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments.  
 
References 
 
Banik, B.K. (2011). Development of a MATLAB-based tool to evaluate the interaction of tidal 
fluctuation and groundwater. Master thesis, JEMES, TUHH, Germany. 
Bear J. (1972). Dynamics of fluids in porous media. New York: American Elsevier.  
Dagan D. (1967). Second-order theory of shallow free-surface flow in porous media. Quarterly 
Journal of Mechanics and Applied Mathematics. 20, 517-26. 
Devlin J.F. (2003). A spreadsheet method of estimating best-fit hydraulic gradient using head data 
from multiple wells. Ground Water. 41(3), 316-320. 
Bredehoeft, J.D. (1967). Response of well-aquifer systems to earth tides. Journal of Geophysical 
Research. 72(12), 3,075-3,087. 
Farrell, E. R. (1994). Analysis of groundwater flow through leaky marine retaining structures. 
Geotechnique. 44, 255–263. 
Ferris, J. G. (1951). Cyclic fluctuations of water level as a basis for determining aquifer 
transmissibility. IAHS Publ. 33, 148–155. 
Godin, G. (1966). Daily mean sea level and short period seiches. International Hydrographic 
Review. 43(2), 75-89. 
Hanson, J.M., and Owen, L.B. (1982). Fracture orientation analysis by the solid earth tidal strain 
method. Presented at the 57th Annual Fall Technical Conference and Exhibition of the Society 
of Petroleum Engineers of AIME, American Institute of Mechanical Engineers, New Orleans, 
Louisiana. September 26-29. 
Hornbeck, R. (1975). Numerical Methods. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall. 
409 
 
Jeng D-S, Li L., Barry D.A. (2002). Analytical solution for tidal propagation in a coupled semi-
confined/phreatic coastal aquifer. Advances in Water Resources. 25(5), 577-584.  
Jiao J.J., Tang Z. (1999).  An analytical solution of groundwater response to tidal fluctuation in 
a leaky confined aquifer. Water Resource Research. 35(3), 747–51. 
Li H., Jiao J.J. (2001). Analytical studies of groundwater-head fluctuation in a coastal confined 
aquifer overlain by a semi permeable layer with storage. Advances in Water Resources. 24(5), 
565–73. 
Li, H.,  Li G. ,  Cheng J. and  Boufadel M. C. (2007). Tide-induced head fluctuations in a 
confined aquifer with sediment covering its outlet at the sea floor. Water Resource Research. 
43, W03404, doi:10.1029/2005WR004724. 
Li L., Barry D.A., Jeng D-S. (2001). Tidal fluctuations in a leaky confined aquifer: dynamic 
effects of an overlying phreatic aquifer. Water Resource Research. 37, 1095–8. 
Li L., Barry D.A., Stagnitti F, Parlange J-Y, Jeng D-S. (2000). Beach water table fluctuations due 
to spring-neap tides: moving boundary effects. Advances in Water Resources. 23, 817-24. 
Melchior, P. (1964). Earth tides in research in geophysics. Edited by H. Odishaw, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts, Massachusetts Institute of Technology Press. 2, 183-193. 
Nielsen P. (1990). Tidal dynamics of the water table in beaches. Water Resource Research. 26, 
2127-34. 
Serfes M.E. (1991). Determining the mean hydraulic gradient of ground water affected by tidal 
fluctuations. Ground Water. 29(4), 549-555. 
Snedecor, G.W., W.G. Cochran (1989). Statistical Methods, 8th edition Ames, Iowa: Iwoa State 
Press. 
Svitil, K. A. (1996). Groundwater secrets. Discover. 17, 28. 
Teo H.T.,  Jeng D.S., Seymour B.R., Barry D.A. and Li L. (2003). A new analytical solution for 
water table fluctuations in coastal aquifers with sloping beaches. Advances in Water Resources. 
26, 1239-1247. 
Van der Kamp G. (1973). Periodic flow of groundwater. Ph.D. dissertation. Free University of 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 
410 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
DEVELOPMENT OF A MATLAB BASED ANALYTICAL CALCULATION TOOL FOR 
GROUNDWATER POLLUTION PROBLEMS 
 
 
Bijit Kumar Banik1 and Wilfried Schneider2 
 
 
ABSTRACT: Contaminant transport in the subsurface has been one of the most important 
research topics in the hydrological sciences and engineering in the last four decades. Although 
many transport problems must be solved numerically, analytical solutions are still pursued by 
many scientists because they can provide better physical insights into the problems. The objective 
of this project work was to develop a MATLAB based software (named ATMOD), derived from 
different analytical solutions of published literature, to analyze groundwater problems. Eight 
different source geometry were incorporated and one of those was considering the effect of 
vertical flow. Unfortunately there were no analytical solutions for the source having a finite 
aquifer thickness with vertical flow. So for that case the solution for semi-infinite aquifer 
thickness was used. Six different source strength functions were used in order to have a wide 
range of applicability. An executable file was built in order to get access to the software without 
having any MATLAB environment. 
 
Keywords: Advection, Analytical solution, ATMOD, Diffusion, Groundwater, MATLAB.  
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Mathematical modeling of the transport of contaminants in groundwater involves the application 
of analytical or numerical solutions of the basic advection-dispersion equation. Numerical models 
are more versatile and can provide more accurate solutions of complex situations. However, 
application of these models is typically more time consuming and expensive than analytical 
models, and may present problems due to numerical dispersion and other inaccuracies induced by 
the numerical grid. Analytical models provide a more simplified approximation of reality due to 
the many required assumptions but can provide reliable and accurate results for simulations that 
do not involves complex aquifer heterogeneity or boundary conditions. Analytical solutions are 
usually derived from the basic physical principles and free from numerical dispersions and other 
truncation errors that often occurred in numerical simulations (Zheng and Bennett, 1995). With 
help of analytical solutions to estimate movements of contaminant plumes, we can save a lot of 
effort to guide and collect data and monitor water quality despite complexities of hydro-geologic 
systems (Wexler, 1992). Using analytical solutions, we can better understand the mechanism of 
                                                        
1 Assistant Professor, CEE Department, SUST, Sylhet, Bangladesh. bijit_sustbd@yahoo.com  
2 Professor, Institut für Wasserressourcen und Wasserversorgung, Technische Universität Hamburg-
Harburg, Germany, w.schneider@tu-harburg.de 
411 
 
contaminant transport, predict the movement of contaminant plumes, measure the field 
parameters related to solute transport, and verify the results of numerical modeling. 
   Analytical solutions can be developed for any type of source condition. Solutions for the 
point sources are the most commonly used and are available in numerous publications (e.g., 
Javandel et al., 1984; Hunt, 1983; Bear, 1979; and Ogata, 1970). Landfills and land treatment 
facilities are more accurately modeled by plane sources. Domenico and Palciauskas (1982) 
applied a vertical plane source to this problem. Ogata (1970) and Codell and Schreiber (1972) 
also present solutions for transport and dispersion in groundwater from a vertical plane source. 
However, a horizontal plane source is more appropriate to model dispersive transport from 
landfills or land treatment facilities (Galya, 1987). 
   The solutions of one-, two-, and three-dimensional deterministic advection–dispersion 
equations have been investigated in numerous publications before and are still actively studied. 
For instance, Ogata and Banks (1961), Sauty (1980), and van Genuchten (1981) have provided 
analytical solutions of one-dimensional transport with the first-type (Dirichlet), second-type 
(Neumann), and third-type (Cauchy) boundary conditions, respectively. Yeh (1981) have given 
the generalized analytical one-, two-, and three-dimensional description and computer code for 
estimating the transport of waste in groundwater aquifers. Domenico and Robbins (1984) have 
explored some multi-dimensional transport problems. Batu (1989, 1993) have studied the two-
dimensional analytical solute transport model with the first- and the second-type boundary 
conditions. Wexler (1992) and it’s cited references there have documented many previously 
derived analytical solutions with different initial and boundary conditions. Leij et al., (1993) have 
studied the non-equilibrium multi-dimensional transport using the Laplace and Fourier 
transforms, and Leij et al., (2000) have used Green’s functions to describe persistent solute source 
transport considering downward flow or rate-limited dissolution. The Green’s functions method 
(GFM) is particularly attractive to deal with transport problems involving arbitrary initial or inlet 
solute profiles, several dimensions, irregular geometries (Greenberg, 1971), fractured media 
(Fogden et al., 1988), or water flow that is not parallel to the stratification of the porous medium 
(Ellsworth and Butters, 1993). 
   Problems of persistent DNAPL or LNAPL contamination were described as boundary value 
problems by Chrysikopoulos et al. (1994) and Holman and Javandel (1996), respectively. 
Solutions for transport of the NAPL pool were obtained with integral transforms. Shan and 
Javandel (1997) solved a similar problem with several integral transforms by dividing the 
medium into three regions, with the source located on top of the center region. The GFM 
facilitates the solution of transport problems involving persistent sources and different source 
conditions. 
   In this study the analytical solution based on the Green’s function method, derived by Park 
and Zhan (2001), was used to have the general form of contaminant transport from three-
dimensional finite, instantaneous or continuous sources in a finite-thickness aquifer. Using the 
same methodology, they also derive the solutions for the point, line, and area sources in a finite-
thickness aquifer. Another solution using Green function, considering the downward flow or rate-
limited dissolution having an infinite aquifer thickness, done by Leij et al., (2000) was also 
considered in this work.  
   So, the main objective of this study was to make a MATLAB-based program to calculate 
concentration with respect to time and distance for different types of sources and geometry. 
Seven analytical solutions were taken from Park and Zhan (2001) where the downward flow was 
not considered, whereas one analytical solution for horizontal plane source with a vertical flow 
was taken from Leij et al., (2000). The solutions from both authors were used to calculate the 
412 
 
concentration at any point (x,y,z) and time t. To calculate the concentration for an observation 
well that is screened from the top of the aquifer to a depth zw, an averaging must be applied and 
we made it according to Charbeneau (2000). 
 
2. Theory 
 
2.1 Solutions from Park and Zhan, (2001) 
 
The general geometry of the problem is shown in Fig. 1 (except the infiltration or downward flow, 
this is modeled by Leij et al., (2000)). The origin of the coordinate system is at the upper 
boundary. The positive z-axis is downward. The aquifer is assumed infinite in the x- and y-
directions but finite in the z-direction with a thickness of b. The aquifer is horizontal without 
curvature. Bedrock or extremely low-permeability clay stratum exists underneath the aquifer, 
thus a no-flow boundary is assumed at the bottom of the aquifer (z=b). A no-flow or a water table 
boundary exists at the top of the aquifer. If a water table boundary exists, we assume that the 
slope of the water table is so small that we can assume the water table to be parallel to the lower 
boundary. The shape of the contaminant source is a parallelepiped body with, x  [0, x0], y  [-
y0, y0] and z  [z0, z1]. Steady-state groundwater flow is along the x-axis. The three-dimensional 
deterministic advection–dispersion equation, which describes equilibrium solute transport within 
a vertically finite aquifer from a finite source (Park and Zhan, 2001), is written as follows: 
),,,(2
2
2
2
2
2
tzyxqC
x
Cv
z
CD
y
CD
x
CD
t
C
vzyx 













    (1) 
with boundary conditions: 
00,,0),,,(  tandbzytzyC   (2) 
00,,0),,,(  tandbzxtzxC   (3) 
0
,0),,,(),0,,(









t
y
x
tbyxC
z
tyxC
z
   (4) 
413 
 
 
Figure 1 A schematic diagram of a three-dimensional source body within parallel non-penetrable 
boundaries for the solute. The upper boundary is a no-flow boundary or a water table boundary. 
The lower boundary is a no-flow boundary. 
 
Initial condition: 
bz
y
x
zyxC




0
,0)0,,,(     (5) 
   where C is the solute concentration (g/m3); t is time (day or year); Dx , Dy , and Dz are the 
principal dispersion coefficients in the x-, y-, and z-directions, respectively (m2/day or m2/year); v 
is the groundwater flow velocity (m/day or m/year); λ is the first-order reaction or decay constant 
(1/day or 1/year); qv( x, y, z, t) is the volumetric source strength function (SSF) (g/(m3 day) or 
g/(m3 year)) (qv > 0 means producing contaminant mass, qv < 0 means removing contaminant 
mass); and b is the thickness of the aquifer (m). 
   For a three-dimensional finite source, qv is defined as the mass removed or added to a unit 
aqueous volume at a unit time interval. qv is assumed to have the characteristics of Heaviside 
function : 


 

Otherwise
tandzzzyyyxxtfq
tzyxqv 0
0,,,0),(
),,,( 100000  (6) 
414 
 
where q0 is a constant and f (t) is a function of time. 
   The final three dimensional solutions of contaminant transport in a finite-thickness aquifer 
with a three-dimensional finite source (Park and Zhan, 2001) became: 






























































d
b
nD
b
zn
b
zn
b
zn
n
bzz
D
yyerfc
D
yyerfc
D
vxerfc
D
xvxerfctq
b
tzyxc
z
n
yy
xx
t
v
2
22
1
01
01
00
0
0
expcos)sin(sin2
22
22
)exp()(
4
1),,,(
(7) 
For detailed calculations please referred to Park and Zhan (2001).  
   If an instantaneous (in our program we called it as pulse source) source exists, the SSF qv (t) = 
C0δ(t), where C0 is the source concentration at time t, and δ(t) is the Dirac Delta function. 
Therefore, the instantaneous source solution is expressed by the same equation as Eq. (7) without 
doing the integration and qv is replaced by C0. If the source is eliminated at a certain time t´, we 
can get the solution by changing the lower limit of the integration from 0 to (t-t´) in Eq. (7). 
It is important to emphasize the physical conditions, applications, and limitations of Eq. (7) in 
order to make use of this formula for practical purpose: 
   (1) This equation calculates concentrations for reactive solute transport in a vertically finite 
but horizontally infinite, homogeneous, and anisotropic aquifer with a three-dimensional 
parallelepiped source body x [0, x0], y [-y0, y0] and z [z0, z1]. The first-order reaction or 
radioactive decay has been taken into account. The linear sorption can be incorporated by 
replacing v, Dx , Dy , and Dz with v/R, Dx/R, Dy/R, and Dz/R, respectively, where R is the 
retardation factor (In our program we incorporated the sorption term). A time-dependent but 
space-independent source strength function was used.  
   (2) The following discussion explains how to determine qv and source concentration C0 at 
some hypothetical cases. If doing a tracer test with a continuously adding tracer, qv is the amount 
of mass added to the source zone per unit volume of pore water per unit time. If doing a tracer 
test with an instantaneous tracer, C0 is the mass of tracer added to the source zone per unit 
volume of pore water per unit time.  
   (3) The molecular diffusion into the upper and lower boundaries was not considered in Park 
and Zhan (2001) paper in order to derive the analytical solutions. By neglecting the molecular 
diffusion, the concentration in the aquifer will be slightly overestimated when time is so long that 
the contaminant plume reaches the boundaries. 
 
2.2 Solutions from Leij et al., (2000) 
 
Due to the incorporation of an extra term of downward flow the general form of ADE was 
slightly different from that of Park and Zhan (2001). For a Cartesian coordinate system, the three 
dimensional ADE was: 
415 
 
qCR
x
Cv
z
CD
y
CD
x
CD
t
CR zyx 













2
2
2
2
2
2
   (8) 
   where c is the solute concentration (ML-3) ; R is the solute retardation factor; t is time (T); x 
denotes the position (L) along the longitudinal coordinate in the direction of flow; y and z are 
positions (L) along the transversal coordinates; v is the pore–water velocity (LT-1); Dx is the 
longitudinal dispersion coefficient Dy and Dz are the transversal dispersion coefficients (L2 T-1); λ 
is a first-order degradation factor (T-1) and q is a zero-order source or production term (ML-3T-1), 
which may depend on time or position. 
   The general initial and boundary conditions, i.e., excluding the surface, were: 
 
)0,,(,0)0,,,(  zyxzyxC   (9) 
 
)0,(,0),,,( 

 zytzyC
x
   (10) 
 
)0,(,0),,,( 

 zxtzxC
y
   (11) 
 
),(,0),,,( 

 yxtyxC
z
   (12) 
 
   One important thing is that to make a holistic view, the y- and z-axis used in Leij et al., (2000, 
Fig. 1 there) had changed as shown in Figure 1. 
   Now considering the scenario where there is a small vertical flow in addition to the horizontal 
flow and also ignoring the cross-dispersion terms, the ADE given by Eq. (8) without the zero-
order source term can be modified as follows to include additional term, w, for vertical flow: 
 
z
CwCR
x
Cv
z
CD
y
CD
x
CD
t
CR zyx 
















2
2
2
2
2
2
   (13) 
 
The following condition was selected for the upper boundary: 
 


 









 Otherwise
yyyxxtwg
z
CDwC
z
z 0
),0(),( 000
0
   (14) 
 
where w constitutes the downward pore-water velocity. With the GFM, the final solution 
made by Leij et al., (2000) was (For detailed calculations please look at Leij et al., (2000)): 
416 
 










































































 
d
RD
wRzerfc
D
wz
D
w
RD
wRz
D
R
RD
yyerfc
RD
yyerfc
RD
vRxerfc
RD
vxxRerfctwg
R
tzyxc
zzzzz
yy
xx
t
4
exp
24
)(exp
22
22
)()exp()(
4
1),,,(
2
00
0
0
 (15) 
 
2.3 Source strength function 
For a three-dimensional finite source, source strength is defined as the mass removed or added to 
a unit aqueous volume at a unit time interval. 
   The program had considered six different types of source strength functions. Those are: 
a) Continuous 
b) Pulse or instantaneous 
c) e-function 
d) Step function 
e) Bell-shape function 
f) Gidding’s function 
a) Continuous 
   In this case the source strength is considered as a constant over time. It also can be obtain by 
considering zero decay rate in the e-function. So in this case: 
 
0)( qtq          (16) 
 
b) Pulse or instantaneous 
This is the case when the source appears instantaneously without any time lag. That is it is 
assumed to be emitting solutes in an infinitesimal small time. In practice this is not the 
representative case.  
c) e-function 
This is a very typical source strength function which consider 1st order decay. Those sources that 
have a maximum value initially and lose its strength with respect to time are falling in this group. 
Here the real source is considered at the boundary and it release mass exactly from there. The 
general form of this function is: 
 
)exp()( 0 tqtq         (17) 
 
   where q0 is the initial source strength and λ is the decay rate of the source (T-1). 
d) Step function 
One step was considered to represent this function. Sometimes this is practical that a source is 
emitting solutes continuously for a definite time and then stop. In this case this step function is 
the best to represent the reality.  
417 
 
e) Bell shape function 
Sometimes the real source stays well above the groundwater table (i.e., landfill). In that case if 
we consider an imaginary source staying at the groundwater table, at the initial stage there will be 
no solute or contaminant in the imaginary source. So the imaginary source strength will first 
increase from zero to maximum and after some stage it will start decreasing. The general trend is 
kind of bell shape pattern. This case is applicable for the horizontal area source with vertical 
infiltration. It is very difficult to find an exact strength function for this case. 
   In our case we had considered a case example of cadmium (Cd) heavy metal. From that work 
we took the strength vs time trend. Then we had fitted a trend line and get a formula of that trend 
line. We had considered this trend line as a bell-shape source strength function. It would be better 
to have a more general function rather then taken from a case study. But the user has the options 
to define their own bell-shape by putting the time-concentration data and then fitting the trend 
line. 
   The trend line was fitted by a three degree polynomial. The general function of a three degree 
polynomial is: 
 
ctbtattq  23)(        (18) 
 
   So, the user just will be asked for the values of a, b and c for the bell-shape function. 
f) Gidding’s function 
Gidding’s function is also very useful for the area horizontal source with infiltration. The general 
formula of Gidding’s function is: 
w
xx
cc
c
e
w
xx
I
x
x
w
Ayy

 )
2
(10      (19) 
So, here y is the dependent variable and for our case this is source strength, x is the independent 
variable and for our case this is time. I1 means the first kind of Modified Bessel function of order 
1. 
Remaining four parameters are: 
y0= offset,  
xc = center 
w = width 
A = area 
The user just needs to put those four parameters in the program to run.  
 
2.4 Averaging of concentration 
 
The results from Equation (16), (17), (18) or (19) are used in Equation (7) or (15) to calculate 
the concentration at any point (x,y,z) and time t. To calculate the concentration for an observation 
well that is screened from the top of the aquifer to a depth zw, an averaging must be applied 
(Charbeneau, 2000): 
dztzyxC
z
ztyxC
wz
w
ww 
0
),,,(1),,,(      (20) 
418 
 
   One may use results such as that shown in Equation (20) to calculate the well concentration 
for other screened intervals. Hemstreet (1996) shows that the concentration for a well screened 
between the depth z1 and z2 are given by: 
)),,,(),,,((1),,,,( 1122
12
21 ztyxCzztyxCzzz
zztyxC www 
   (21) 
   In the program Equation (20) was used for averaging the concentration with the exception of 
fixing the interval for 20 and then averaging it after summation, not integration. 
 
3. The Software ATMOD 
 
The software ATMOD was made by MATLAB-2010b. This is an executable version and is able 
to run in any windows system without having an MATLAB environment. The salient feature of 
the software is that it is integrated with six different source type, along with eight different source 
geometry (such as, point, line, area and volume source geometry). That means almost any kind of 
source type and geometry can be covered by this software. Four types of plot can be done 
(Concentration vs Time, Concentration vs Distance, Mass flux vs Time and Mass flux vs 
Distance). Also there is an option for choosing the type of concentration that will be plotted 
(Point concentration or average concentration). 
  
4. Two Case Studies 
 
Two case examples were considered to get an idea of the accuracy of the software. The first one 
was taken from Park and Zhan, (2001) and the other from Leij et al.,(2000). But this is definitely 
not sufficient for the validation of the software. More detailed work is needed in order to get a 
complete picture of the software. 
 
4.1 First case (Line source with no vertical flow) 
 
Figure 2 and 3 are showing the influence of source geometry and dispersion coefficients on the 
concentration distribution. Figure 4 shows the influence of distance from the source on the 
concentration distribution. Three line sources were considered in Figure 2–4.  
The following parameters were used in Figure 2–4. The source mass per unit length is 0.09 g/m 
for the instantaneous line source in Figure 2. The source strength function ql is 0.09 g/(m.day) for 
the continuous line source in Figure 3. The line source along the x-axis is from (0,0,8 m) to (8 
m,0,8 m); the line source along the y-axis is from (0,-4 m,8 m) to (0,4 m,8 m); and the line source 
along the z-axis is from (0,0,0) to (0,0,8 m).  
   The concentration profiles of instantaneous sources in Figure 2 show left skewed bell shapes. 
This is consistent with what was found in previous literature by Park and Zhan, (2001).  
   As shown in Figure 2a and 3a, difference of the source geometry affects the concentration 
distribution significantly if dispersion coefficients are anisotropic. The horizontal line source 
along the regional flow shows the highest concentration, the horizontal line source normal to the 
regional flow shows the second highest concentration, and the vertical source shows the lowest 
concentration. If Dx=Dy=Dz , Figure 2b and 3b show that the difference of the source geometry 
has less significant influence upon the concentration distributions. 
   When the dispersion coefficients are isotropic, the differences of concentration distributions 
419 
 
are less significant for different line source orientations. The remaining slight differences in 
Figure 2b and 3b are caused by the finite aquifer dimensions in the z-direction. If the aquifer 
thickness is infinite, those differences will disappear. 
   Figure 2 and 3 indicate that the source geometry has a profound influence on the 
concentration profiles when the dispersion coefficients are anisotropic. Such influence is 
insignificant when the dispersion coefficients are isotropic. 
   Figure 4 is similar to Figure 3b except that the measuring point is 50-m downstream in Figure 
4, while it is 20-m downstream in Figure 3b. Comparison of Figure 3b and 4 shows that at a near 
field point (Figure 3b), the source geometry influences the concentration distribution, but at a far 
field point (Figure 4), the source geometry has an almost negligible influence upon the 
concentration distribution. 
(a) 
  
(b) 
  
 
 
Figure 2 Theoretical concentration measured at 20-m downstream from the center of the sources 
that is released instantaneously. The released mass per unit length of the source C0=0.09 g/m, 
Dx=0.1 m2/d, b=10 m. (a) Comparison of concentrations from three different types of sources, 
the ratio of Dy/Dx and Dz/Dx are 0.1 and 0.01, respectively; (b) comparison of concentrations from 
three different types of sources, the ratio of Dy/Dx and Dz/Dx are all 1. R=1, λ=0. 
 
 
 
ATMOD Park and Zhan, (2001) 
ATMOD Park and Zhan, (2001) 
420 
 
(a) 
 
 
(b) 
 
 
Fig. 3. Theoretical concentration measured at 20-m downstream from the center of the sources 
that is released continuously. The released mass per unit length of the source ql=0.09 g/(m.day), 
Dx=0.1 m2/d, b=10 m. (a) Comparison of concentrations from three different types of sources, 
the ratio of Dy/Dx and Dz/Dx are 0.1 and 0.01, respectively; (b) comparison of concentrations from 
three different types of sources, the ratio of Dy/Dx and Dz/Dx are all 1. R=1, λ=0. 
 
 
ATMOD Park and Zhan, (2001) 
ATMOD Park and Zhan, (2001) 
421 
 
Figure 4 Theoretical concentration measured at 50-m downstream from the center of the sources that is 
released continuously. The released mass per unit length of the source ql=0.09 g/(m.day), Dx=0.1 m2/d, 
b=10 m, the ratio of Dy/Dx and Dz/Dx are all 1. R=1, λ=0. 
 
4.2 Second case (Horizontal plane source considering vertical flow) 
 
This is the case considering the effect of vertical infiltration while the continuous source is at the 
surface of the aquifer. The source is 20 cm by 20 cm., measurement point in x-direction is 100 cm 
(but for ATMOD this should be 110 cm due to the difference in the definition of the origin of the 
co-ordinate in both computation ) and the measurement point in y-direction is zero. Other 
parameters are v=10cm/day. Dx=5 cm2/day, Dy=Dz=0.5 cm2/day, downward flow w=0.2 cm/day, 
R=1, λ=0. Note that in Leij et al.,(2000) y stands for depth. 
 
Figure 5 Continuous source (20 cm by 20 cm) considering vertical flow. v=10cm/day. Dx=5 
cm2/day, Dy=Dz=0.5 cm2/day, downward flow w=0.2 cm/day, R=1, λ=0. Note that in (a) y means 
depth. Measurement point in x-direction is 100 cm for (a) and 110 cm for (b), in y-direction for 
both (a) & (b) is zero. In addition, for (b) we had considered 1000mg/L of initial source 
concentration. 
8.5 
14 
C/C0 0.01 
ATMOD Park and Zhan, (2001) 
422 
 
   It was not easy to compare the scenario of Leij et al.,(2000) with ATMOD. Because in Leij et 
al.,(2000) the plots were contour where as in ATMOD it was just a line plot. Also in Leij et  
al.,(2000) only the ratio of two concentration was used (C/C0). But in ATMOD we considered the 
C0=1000 mg/L and finally calculate the ratio of that two. 
   If we observe carefully both the output from Leij et al.,(2000) and ATMOD shown in figure 5 
we will see that approximately after 14 days the concentration will be independent of time which 
is depicted in both graph (shown by magenta lines) . Another observation is, in 20th day at a depth 
of 8.5 cm both figure has approximately same (0.01) concentration ratio.  
 
5. Conclusions 
 
Although numerical models are more versatile and can provide more accurate solutions of 
complex situations, due to fact that the application of these models is typically more time 
consuming and expensive than analytical models and may present problems due to numerical 
dispersion and other inaccuracies induced by the numerical grid, analytical could be a good 
option in order to get an simplified approximation of reality with a minimum compromise with 
the accuracy. The main intention of this study was to build a MATLAB-based program in order to 
calculate concentration with respect to time and distance for different types of sources and 
geometry. Seven analytical solutions were taken from Park and Zhan (2001) where the downward 
flow was not considered, whereas one analytical solution for horizontal plane source with a 
vertical flow was taken from Leij et al., (2000).  
 
Acknowledgements 
 
The authors are acknowledging Institut für Wasserressourcen und Wasserversorgung, Technische 
Universität Hamburg-Harburg, Germany for all types of assistance. The authors also thank all 
anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments.  
 
References 
 
Batu, V. (1989). A generalized two-dimensional analytical solution for hydrodynamic dispersion 
in bounded media with the first-type boundary condition at the source. Water Resour. Res. 25. 
pp 1125–1132. 
Batu, V. (1993). A generalized two-dimensional analytical solute transport model in bounded 
media for flux-type finite multiple sources. Water Resour. Res. 29. pp 2881–2892. 
Bear, J. (1979). Hydraulics of Groundwater. McGraw Hill, Inc. 567 pp. 
Charbeneau, R. J. (2000). Groundwater Hydraulics and Pollutant Transport, Prentice-Hall, Inc. 
New Jersey. pp 426-428. 
Chrysikopoulos, C.V., Voudrias, E.A., Fyrillas, M.M. (1994). Modeling of contaminant transport 
from dissolution of nonaqueous phase liquid pools in saturated porous media. Transp. Porous 
Media 16. pp 125–145. 
Domenico, P.A., Robbins, G.A. (1984). A new method of contaminant plume analysis. Ground 
Water 23. pp 476–485. 
Ellsworth, T.R., Butters, G.L. (1993). Three-dimensional analytical solutions to the advection-
dispersion equation in arbitrary Cartesian coordinates. Water Resour. Res. 29. pp 3215–3225. 
Fogden, A., Landman, K.A., White, L.R. (1988). Contaminant transport in fractured porous 
423 
 
media: steady state solutions by a boundary integral method. Water Resour. Res. 24. pp 1384–
1396. 
Galya, D.P. (1987). A horizontal plane source model for ground-water transport. Ground Water v. 
25, no. 6. pp 733-739. 
Greenberg, M.D. (1971). Application of Green’s Functions in Science and Engineering. Prentice-
Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ. 
Holman, H.-Y.N., Javandel, I. (1996). Evaluation of transient dissolution of slightly water-soluble 
compounds from a light nonaqueous phase liquid pool. Water Resour. Res. 32. pp 915–923. 
Hunt, B. (1983). Mathematical Analysis of Groundwater Resources. Butterworth & Co., London. 
271 pp. 
Javadel, I., C. Doughty, and C.F. Tsang. (1984). Groundwater Transport: Handbook of 
Mathematical Models. American Geophysical Union, Washington, D.C. 228 pp. 
Leij, F.J., Toride, N., van Genuchten, M.Th. (1993). Analytical solutions for non-equilibrium 
solute transport in three-dimensional porous media. J. Contam. Hydrol. 151. pp 193–228. 
Leij, F.J., Priesack, E., Schaap, M.G. (2000). Solute transport modeled with Green’s functions 
with application to persistent solute sources. J. Contam. Hydrol. 41. pp 155–173. 
Ogata, A. (1970). Theory of Dispersion in a Granular Medium. U.S. Geological Survey 
Professional Paper 411-1. 34 pp. 
Ogata, A., Banks, R.B. (1961). A solution of differential equation of longitudinal dispersion in 
porous media. U.S. Geol. Surv. Prof. Pap. 411, A1–A7. 
Park, E., Zhan, H. (2001). Analytical solutions of contaminant transport from finite one-, two-, 
and three-dimensional sources in a finite-thickness aquifer. J. Contam. Hydrol. 53. pp 41–61. 
Sauty, J.P. (1980). An analysis of hydrodispersive transfer in aquifers. Water Resour. Res. 16. pp 
145–158. 
Shan, C., Javandel, I. (1997). Analytical solutions for solute transport in a vertical aquifer section. 
J. Contam. Hydrol. 27. pp 63–82. 
van Genuchten, M.T. (1981). Analytical solutions for chemical transport with simultaneous 
adsorption, zero-order production and first-order decay. J. Hydrol. 49. pp 213–233. 
Wexler, E.J. (1992). Analytical solutions for one-, two-, and three-dimensional solute transport in 
ground-water systems with uniform flow. U.S. Geological Survey, Techniques of Water-
Resources Investigations, Book 3, Chap. B7. 
Yeh, G.T. (1981). AT123D: analytical transient one-, two-, and three-dimensional simulation of 
waste transport in an aquifer system. Rep. ORNL-5602. Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak 
Ridge, TN. 
Zheng, C., Bennett, G.D. (1995). Applied Contaminant Transport Modeling, Theory and Practice. 
Van Nostrand-Reinhold, New York, USA. 
 
 
 
424 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
CAR  PARKING CHARACTERISTICS IN DHAKA METROPOLITAN CITY, 
BANGLADESH: A CASE STUDY 
 
 
 Mahzabin Afroz 1, Hasnin Muktadir 2, Quazi Sazzad Hossain3 and Md. Enamul Hasan4  
 
 
ABSTRACT: The increasing number of vehicles generates various parking problems such as 
insufficiency of parking spaces, illegal parking etc. This study explores the parking 
characteristics in the Central Business District (CBD) area of Dhaka metropolitan city, 
specifically on the current parking supply, and the efficiency of parking space utilization. Data 
were collected by using license plate survey at four routes of on-street parking lots and two off-
street parking garages. The adapted stall dimension in Bangladesh is 5.38 meters length and 2.47 
meters width which do not differ much from other developing countries.  The parking charges in 
on-street facilities are more than the off-street parking. Consequently, the degree of utilization of 
off-street facilities has been relatively low compared to that of the on-street spaces. Considering 
the whole study area, parking supply exceeds the demand, although some on-street areas are 
showing excessive utilization causing illegal parking. 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Parking is a critical component of transportation policy especially for the large cities. Planned 
parking facilities is reqiured to improve roadway capacity and safety. It has been noted that on-
street parking comprises roughly 60 to 90 percent of the requirements in small town and around 
30 percent in urban areas (Afroze, 1991). Dhaka city is one of the fast growing metropolitan 
cities with increasing population in the world. The existing transportation system has become 
hazardous due to its heterogeneous characteristics and insufficient road network system. The 
capital city of Bangladesh, Dhaka performs as the economic hub of the country. Because of the 
economic boom, the need for automobile oriented transport facilities is increasing excessively. In 
the last four years, alarming numbers of new vehicles are registered. In the year 2009, 56,778 
vehicles are registered among those 17,665 are cars. The registered vehicles in the year 2009 are 
almost three times of the year 2006 (www.brta.bd.gov, 2009). The registered vehicles are only 
about 25 to 50 percent of the actual vehicles plying the roadways due to limited enforcement of 
                                                        
1Lecturer & Post-graduate Student, Department of Civil Engineering, KUET, Khulna-9203, Bangladesh. 
sarlinkuet@gmail.com  
2Undergraduate Student, Department of Civil Engineering, KUET, Khulna-9203, Bangladesh. 
sunny_rcc@yahoo.com 
3Professor, Department of Civil Engineering, KUET, Khulna-9203, Bangladesh. sazzad1999@yahoo.com 
4 Undergraduate Student, Department of Civil Engineering, KUET, Khulna-9203, Bangladesh. 
ehshuvo@yahoo.com 
 
 
425 
registration regulations (ADB, 2006). It is roughly estimated that out of 8760 hours of a year, the 
car runs on an average for only 400 hours which is only 4.5% of the available time (Kadiyali, 
2004). So, parking is a serious concern and requires a carefully considered investigation.  
   The traffic circulation in CBD is one of the most pivotal issues because utmost amount of 
vehicles come for different purpose in the city center. In Motijheel Commercial Area, more than 
50 percent of roads are occupied by parked car (www.bangladeshnews.com, 2009). As it is today, 
the authorities of Dhaka Metropolitan city’s main thrust is to provide effective measures to 
alleviate the parking condition and to hasten the impact of the increased in automobile demands 
to the parking condition of the city. However, the lack of information of the parking 
characteristics in the city makes it difficult for the concerned authorities to develop effective 
measures and policies. As such, this study was carried out. This paper includes the existing on-
street and off-street car parking facilities in the central zone of Dhaka metropolitan city, 
Bangladesh and field surveys were conducted to assess the characteritics of parking.  
 
2. Study Area 
 
Dhaka metropolitan city is located in the southern portion of the district of Dhaka and almost in 
the middle portion of the country. The city is surrounded by the main river Buriganga in the 
south; the Balu and the Shitalakha rivers in the east; Tongi khal in the north and the Turag river 
in the west. The city is confined between latitudes 24040′ to 24054′ N and longitudes 90020′ to 
90030′ E and it covers an area of about 365 square kilometers with a population of about 11 
million (Alamgir, et al., 2005). Most of the part of the city are urbanized and well developed in 
infrastructures and others. Both motorized and non-motorized vehicles run on the busy streets at 
the same time, resulting in deteriorating the traffic congestion. 
   The study area is just a portion of Motijheel commercial area of Dhaka city. It lies within the 
city’s main business hub. The study area for on-street parking was divided into four routes. 
Routes 1, 2, 3, and 4 are the east side of Toyenbee road, west side of Toyenbee road, north side of 
Motijheel road and south side of Motijheel road, respectively. There is only one off-street parking 
lot in the vicinity of the study area. The name of this parking lot is Sadharan Bima Tower (SBT) 
multilevel car parking garage. In this study SBT and Bashundhara City Shopping Complex 
(BCSC) car parking lot were considered for data collection.  
 
2.1 Data Collection 
 
A series of surveys were carried out to collect the required data for the analysis of this study. 
These surveys were carried out to assess the parking demand, parking characteristics, parking 
accumulation and parking duration within the study area. These surveys were inventory of 
parking facilities, on-street parking observational survey and license plate survey. 
 
2.1.1 Inventories of Parking Facilities 
 
Inventories of both on-street and off-street parking facilities were carried out to determine the 
availability of parking spaces in the study area. Marked parking spaces were manually counted by 
a group of surveyors. On-street parking inventory included the dergree of parking restriction, the 
location of space, and the parking orientation. A seperate inventory of off-street parking facilities 
in the study area was conducted. The area of the parking facility, whether parking lot or garage 
was measured by assigned surveyors to determine the avilable spaces in each parking lot or 
 
 
426 
garage. Inventories in this aspect include the estimated number of spaces available, methods of 
operation, type of parking, status of parking facilities, and the parking fee rate. Observation on 
the length of existing parking stalls was also made. Each marked stall was measured directly.  
 
 
Figure 1 Study area showing the routes 
 
2.1.2 License Number Plate Survey 
 
To carry out the license number plate survey, the study area was divided into four routes.                              
On-street parking survey was carried out on week day in sunny weather from 9:00 A.M. to 6:00 
P.M. Two surveyors were assigned to collect the data for each route. The license number plates 
of parked vehicles, their location, time of arrival, and time of departure were checked and 
recorded by the surveyors assigned to monitor the vehicles in their respective route. The 
surveyors were revisiting each space at every 30 minutes interval. Three digits of the plate 
numbers were recorded.  
   Two surveyors were conducted the off-street parking survey.  License number plates of parked 
vehicles were recorded for every 30 minutes. Time of arrival or departure was recorded at the 
instant of observation. The two chosen parking garage were the Sadharan Bima Tower (SBT) 
 
 
427 
multilevel car parking garage and Bashundhara City Shopping Complex (BCSC) car parking lot. 
The survey for both the places was conducted from 9:00 A.M. to 5:00 P.M. on a sunny day. 
Surveyors were positioned at the entrance and exit points to record the time-in and time-out for 
each vehicle corresponding with their respective number plates. It was ensured that the day of 
data collection is not affected by any kind of factors that can affect the general pattern of parking 
characteristics.  
 
3. Results and Discussions 
 
The parking characteristics intend to determine the degree o parking utilization and the existing 
parking facilities. Parking inventory for both on-street and off-street parking facilities are 
covered. Furthermore, the utilization of parking facilities is also presented to elaborate the present 
parking demand. 
 
3.1 Parking Stall Standards 
 
The parking space is specified in terms of width, depth, angle and use. The base dimension was 
determined by using the 85th percentile vehicle size determined from an inventory of existing car 
dimensions. The results of statistical analysis on the surveyed cars are presented in Table 1. The 
maximum width and length of the vehicle are 1.83 and 5.03 meters respectively. The 85th 
percentile, which values are the usual basis of standards falls on 1.71 and 4.62 meters for width 
and length respectively. For the usual observed door-swing clearance of 0.76 meters, the 
minimum width then should be 2.47 meters. The length of stall can be computed as the base 
length plus additional rear clearance. The minimum length should be 5.38 meters. So, the stall 
dimension can be taken as 5.38 meters length, 2.47 meters width and 60 degree angle. It is 
understood that these should be applicable for 600 angles parking only.  
 
Table 1 Dimensions of Locally Available Cars 
 
Statistics Length (m) Width (m) 
Minimum 3.66 1.68 
Maximum 5.03 1.83 
Average 4.38 1.71 
No. of car model 10 10 
85th  percentile 4.62 1.71 
 
   On-street parking in the study area is usually in angular position. Parking can be made on 
marked places only. Visibly marked stalls were directly measured. The survey revealed that 
marked stall dimensions are 5.38 meters length, 2.47 meters width and 60 degrees angle. 
 
3.2 Parking Fees 
 
Presently parking fee is being charged for on-street and off-street parking. In the absence of 
parking fee the user can move from one parking lot to another thus creating available demand. 
 
 
428 
Parking fees are applied to influence traveler mode choice, time and amount of travel, and to shift 
drivers from a congested location. Parking fees may cover operating costs and a portion of the 
capital costs. The present on-street and off-street parking fee is shown in Table 2. 
 
Table 2 Existing parking fee  
 
Type of parking First two hours 
(Taka) 
After two hours 
(Taka/hour) 
Full day 
(Taka) 
On-street 20.00 10.00 50.00 
Off-street 
SBT 15.00 5.00 50.00 
BCSC -- -- 20.00 
 
3.3 Parking Utilization 
 
Parking utilization describes the degree of facility’s usage at the existing conditions. The general 
utilization indicators are: accumulation of vehicle, occupancy ratio, turn-over rate, and duration. 
These are discussed in the following sections. 
 
3.3.1 Parking Accumulation 
 
This index shows the pattern and timing of vehicles on how they utilized the space. The pattern 
of accumulations is summarized as in Table 3. 
 
Table 3 Peak parking accumulation within the study area 
 
Location 
Available 
Spaces 
(Nos.) 
Peak Parking 
Accumulation 
(Nos.) 
V/C 
Ratio 
On-street  
Route-1 121 84 0.69 
Route-2 153 167 1.09 
Route-3 180 154 0.86 
Route-4 200 208 1.04 
Average 654 613 0.94 
Off-street  
SBT 565 148 0.26 
BCSC 900 498 0.55 
Average 1465 6460 0.44 
 
   The hourly variations in terms of the vehicles parked on different routes for on-street is as 
shown in Figure 2. It is seen that the accumulation reaches maximum by 1100hr and declines 
gradually and again becomes maximum in the afternoon by 1330hr for route 1. But in case of 
route 2, 3, and 4, the accumulation reach maximum by 1330hr, 1430hr, and 1330hr, respectively 
 
 
429 
and decrease gradually. The maximum overall utilization occurred at 1330hr when 604 vehicles 
observed randomly utilizing 654 available spaces in the study area. This happens due to 
availability of restaurants in this area.  
 
 
 
Figure 2 Accumulation vs. time of the day curve for on-street parking 
 
   The hourly variation of the parked vehicles in off-street parking garage is as shown in Figure 3. 
It is seen that the peak accumulation is observed from 1300hr to 1330hr for SBT car parking 
garage. This may be due to the same reason of the on-street parking. But in case of BCSC 
parking lot, the peak accumulation reaches maximum at 1330hr and declines by afternoon and 
again becomes maximum at 1800hr. The parking generators of this parking lot are mostly private 
and government offices. These offices generated trips for parking after the office hour. Because 
of this, maximum accumulation occurs at 1800hr. It is noticed from the above discussion that 
more vehicles utilized the on-street parking spaces than the off-street facilities throughout the 
day. This is an indication that on-street parking is widely practiced than off-street parking.  
 
   
 Figure 3 Accumulation vs. time of the day curve for off-street parking 
 
3.3.2 Parking Turnover Rate 
 
Parking turnover rate is another measurement of parking utilization. This measurement reveals 
the number of vehicles utilizing the same stall over a given time period. Papacostas and 
 
 
430 
Prevedouros (1993) mentioned that a turnover rate four or more during an 8-hour period is 
considered high. Parking turnover rate has been examined separately for on-street and off-street 
parking facilities. Table 4 shows the parking turnover rate of on-street and off-street parking. It is 
seen that the average turnover rate of on-street parking at route 1, 2, 3, and 4 is 2.07, 2.48, 2.51, 
and 2.76 vehicles per stall per day, respectively. All of the routes fall under the low turnover rate. 
The overall turnover rate for on-street parking is 2.50 vehicles per stall per day.  
 
Table 4 Parking turnover of on-street and off-street parking 
 
Location Available spaces Observed 
vehicles 
Turnover  
(Vehicle/Stall/Day) 
On-street 
Route-1 
Route-2 
Route-3 
Route-4 
121 
153 
180 
200 
250 
380 
452 
551 
2.07 
2.48 
2.51 
2.76 
Total 654 1633 2.50 
Off-street 
SBT 
BCSC 
565 
900 
244 
1342 
0.43 
1.49 
Total 1465 1586 1.08 
 
   On the other hand, off-street parking differs from that of on-street parking. A total of 1465 
vehicles were accommodated by the off-street parking facilities (SBT and BCSC parking lot). As 
a result, for the overall off-street parking facility, the turnover rate is 1.08 vehicles per stall per 
day, which is below the on-street parking result. Hence, it can be concluded that the on-street 
parkers deal with short time business while the off-street parkers are all-day workers and business 
operators. 
 
3.3.3 Parking duration 
 
Parking duration is the time spends in the parking space. Parking duration measures the effective 
utilization of parking facilities needed for an efficient planning and design of parking facilities. 
The on-street parking has an average duration of 2.57, 2.65, 3.45 and 3.41 hours for route 1, 2, 3, 
and 4, respectively as shown in Table 6. The survey showed that route 4 has the highest average 
duration among the four routes in the study area. For the entire area, the average duration is 3.02 
hours per vehicle. Off-street parking duration is slightly longer comparing to that of the on-street 
parking. The average duration at SBT and BCSC parking lot is 3.66 and 2.99 hours per vehicle, 
respectively. The SBT parking lot has the highest average duration since most of the parkers are 
long time worker. The average duration of off-street parking facility is 3.33 hours per vehicle.  
Motorists do not want to use the off-street parking facilities for a short time business purposes. 
Moreover, parkers who want to stay long time in their destination usually parked in off-street 
parking facilities. 
 
 
 
431 
   The parking duration data were analyzed to determine the 85th percentile duration. In order to 
obtain this value, the cumulative frequency versus time curve was drawn for the effective 
utilization of parking facilities. The graphical representation of these curves is shown in Figure 4 
to 9. 
 
       
Figure 4 Cumulative frequency vs. Time curve for route 1     Figure 5 Cumulative frequency vs. Time curve for route 2 
         
Figure 6 Cumulative frequency vs. Time curve for route 3     Figure 7 Cumulative frequency vs. Time curve for route 4 
       
 
 Figure 8 Cumulative frequency vs. Time curve for SBT       Figure 9 Cumulative frequency vs. Time curve for BCSC 
   The summary of the 85th percentile duration is given in Table 5. Route 3 has the highest value 
of 85th percentile parking duration (8.20 hr.) among the other routes in the on-street parking. The 
result is not surprising since most of the parking generators in this route are private and public 
 
 
432 
offices which generate work trips.  For the entire study area, the average 85th percentile duration 
of on-street parking is 6.20 hr and off-street parking is 5.60 hr. 
 
Table 5 85th Percentile Duration of Parked Cars 
 
Type of Parking 85th Percentile Duration (hr.) 
On-street 
Route - 1 5.00 
Route - 2 5.40 
Route - 3 8.20 
Route - 4 6.00 
Average  6.20 
Off-street 
SBT 5.80 
BCSC 5.40 
Average 5.60 
 
 
3.4 Parking Demand and Supply 
 
One of the important factors that influences the parking demand is the driver’s destination. It is 
assumed to be nearest or within convenient walking distance from the parking space utilized. 
Parking supply can be expressed in terms of dynamic capacity of the parking space. The dynamic 
capacity of the on-street and off-street parking was estimated by using the Equation (1). This 
equation was developed by Mcshane and Roess (1990). 
 
     Pd  (1)  
 
   Where, Pd = Dynamic parking supply; N = Number of spaces of a given type and time 
restriction; T = Time that N spaces of a given type and time restriction are available during the 
study period (hr.); D = Average parking duration (hr. /veh.); and F = Turnover factors. The factor 
F has a value ranging from 0.85 to 0.95. For this study, it is assumed that the average effect of 
turnover would be 10%, therefore F should be 0.90. 
   The summary of parking demand and supply are presented in Table 6. In case of on-street 
parking, out of 654 spaces available, 1633 vehicles were observed utilizing the spaces. The 
utilization of this type draws the demand at 1633 vehicles for a period of 9.0 hours study period. 
   In case of on-street parking, a total of 1844 cars can be accommodated in 654 available spaces 
in the study area. This does not mean that these vehicles would park at the same time, rather, in 
over 9.0 hours all these vehicles could park. Off –street parking can accommodate a total 3894 
vehicles on the 1465 available spaces. Table 6 also shows the comparison of deficiencies and 
surpluses for on-street and off-street parking. Off-street parking facilities in both the parking lots 
show surpluses. This is an indication of being underutilized.  
  
 
 
 
 
433 
Table 6 Summary of Parking Demand and Supply 
 
Type of  
Parking 
Available 
spaces 
 (Nos.) 
Average 
duration  
(Hr/Veh) 
Parking  
demand 
(Veh) 
Parking  
supply 
(Veh) 
Surplus 
(Veh) 
Deficiency 
(Veh) 
1. On-street 
Route 1 121 2.57 250 403 153 - 
Route 2 153 2.65 380 494 114 - 
Route 3 180 3.45 452 446 - 06 
Route 4 200 3.41 551 501 - 50 
Total 654 3.02 1633 1844 267 56 
2. Off-street 
SBT 565 3.66 134 1320 1186 - 
BCSC 900 2.99 390 2574 2184 - 
Total 1465 3.33 524 3894 3370  
 
   On-street parking spaces show surpluses in route 1 and 2. This is a sign of being underutilized. 
The deficiencies in on-street parking are recorded at route 3 and 4. Between the routes surveyed, 
route 4 showed the highest deficiencies at 50 vehicles inspite of being the route has the highest 
on-street parking capacity. So, it can be concluded that the utilization of spaces of all the routes is 
not well distributed. In an overall consideration of the study area, deficiencies can be covered by 
the surpluses. Usually, the supply still exceeds the parking demand by about 211 vehicles.  
 
 
4. Conclusions 
 
The population of Dhaka metropolitan city is growing at a rapid rate. This coupled with narrow 
roads within the city has resulted in parking problems and traffic congestions. The parking 
surveys carried out shows that Bangladesh adapted a 5.38 meters by 2.47 meters parking stall 
standard for angular parking which is different from other Asian countries like Singapore (4.71 
meters x 2.37 meters), Thailand (5.91 meters x 2.46 meters) and Taiwan (5.91 meters  2.46 
meters). The surveys result also showed that the present on-street parking fee is Taka 20.00 for 
first two hours, and then Taka 10.00 per hour. The present off-street parking fees at SBT is Taka 
15.00 for first two hours and then Taka 5.00 per hour and at BCSC is Taka 20.00 and Taka 10.00 
for car and motorcycle, respectively. It is not enough to pay the costs of operation. The utilization 
of off-street facilities is quite low having an average occupancy ratio of 0.44 compared to 0.94 
for on-street parking facilities. Moreover, the on-street parking turnover rate is faster and duration 
is shorter than the off-street parking. Generally, parking supply exceed the demand, although the 
route 3 and 4 displayed parking supply deficiencies in on-street parking. This shows that the 
utilization of space is not enough to fulfill the demand which is resulting to illegal parking. It can 
be also concluded that the use of off-street parking is not popular here. Most of the drivers are not 
interested to park in off-street parking because of far distance. The results of this study are 
important as guide for the city planners and traffic authorities for any future or present parking 
system planning, management and development.   
 
 
 
434 
References 
 
Afroze, N. (1991), A study of Parking Characteristics in Bangkok, M Engg. Thesis, School of 
Civil Engineering, Asian Institute of Technology, Thailand. 
Asian Development Bank (2006), Country Synthesis Report on Urban Air Quality Management, 
USA. 
Kadiyali, L.R. (2004), Traffic Engineering and Transport Planning, (7th Ed.), Khanna Publishers, 
Delhi, India. 
Mcshane, W.R. and Roess, R.P. (1990), Traffic Engineering, Prentice-Hall Inc., Englewood 
Cliffs, New Jersey. 
Papacostas, C.S. and Prevedouros, P.D. (1993), Transportation Engineering and Planning, (3rd 
Ed.), Prentice- Hall International, New Jersey, U.S.A. 
Alamgir, M., McDonald, C., Roehl, K.E. and Ahsan, A (2005), Integrated Management and Safe 
Disposal of Municipal Solid Waste in Least Developed Asian Countries: A Feasibility Study, 
WasteSafe Report, European Commission’s Project at KUET, Bangladesh.  
Website: http://www.brta.bd.gov 
Website: http://www.bangladeshnews.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
435 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
ESTIMATION OF IDEAL SATURATION FLOW RATE AT SIGNALIZED 
INTERSECTIONS WITH RESPECT TO THE ROAD CONDITIONS OF DHAKA 
METROPOLITAN CITY, BANGLADESH 
 
 
 Ismail Saifullah1, Mahzabin Afroz 2, Quazi Sazzad Hossain3, Md. Saiful Islam4 and Molla 
Ashikur Rahman 5 
 
 
ABSTRACT: Saturation flow is an important parameter in the capacity analysis of signalized 
intersections. A small change in the saturation flow rate may cause significant deviation in the 
calculated green intervals and cycle time. This paper presents the estimation of ideal saturation 
flow rate of through vehicles at signalized intersections in Dhaka city of Bangladesh. Headway 
data of through vehicles were collected in order to calculate the saturation flow rate at different 
intersections by using audio cassette recorder. Linear regression analysis was used to estimate the 
ideal saturation flow rate. An equation of saturation flow rate for varying lane width in through 
lane was developed. The result of this study shows that the ideal saturation flow rate that 
represents the traffic condition of Dhaka city is 1864 pcuphgpl. 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
In the design of a signalized intersection, it is very important to determine the saturation flow rate 
of that intersection. The term saturation flow is defined as the maximum rate of flow that can 
pass through a given road space under prevailing roadway and traffic conditions, during the 
effective green time in a signal phase. Saturation flow is an important parameter in the design of 
cycle time for traffic signals. The ability to predict the saturation flow rate is crucial to the design 
of signalized intersection since it is the basis for determination of traffic signal timings and 
evaluation of intersection performance. For existing signalized intersections, saturation flow can 
be measured directly by using standard methods. 
 
1Assistant Professor, Department of Civil Engineering, KUET, Khulna-9203, Bangladesh, 
saifullah0201113@yahoo.com 
2Lecturer & Post-graduate Student, Department of Civil Engineering, KUET, Khulna-9203, Bangladesh. 
sarlinkuet@gmail.com 
3Professor, Department of Civil Engineering, KUET, Khulna-9203, Bangladesh. sazzad1999@yahoo.com 
4Undergraduate Student, Department of Civil Engineering, KUET, Khulna-9203, Bangladesh. 
saiful.islam@mbmtcc.com 
5Undergraduate Student, Department of Civil Engineering, KUET, Khulna-9203, Bangladesh. 
ashik.ce@gmail.com 
   
 
436 
 
 However, at the design stage for new intersection that is not possible and it is necessary to make 
prediction from other known factors. Therefore, in order to estimate the saturation flow rate for 
new signal installations, a generalized predictive formula is needed (Kimber et al. 1986). An 
idealized view of saturation flow rate at signalized intersection is illustrated in Figure 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1 Graphical presentation of saturation flow (Kimber et al., 1986) 
   The traffic in Dhaka city of Bangladesh is heterogeneous in character and the interaction 
between vehicles being maximum at saturation state. It is necessary to convert the mixed volume 
of traffic into an equivalent homogeneous traffic volume of passenger cars in order to consider 
the effect of traffic factors on saturation flow rate. 
   However, the current method in estimating the saturation flow rate adopted in Bangladesh is 
based on the method developed by Webster (1958) in United Kingdom in the 50’s and 60’s. Due 
to certain distinct differences such as road system, vehicle composition and urban travel 
behaviour between traffic conditions in Bangladesh and in the United Kingdom, this method may 
not be representative of local traffic condition in Bangladesh. As such, a study on the estimation 
of saturation flow rate based on local traffic and roadway conditions is carried out.  
   The objective of this study is to estimate the ideal saturation flow rate at signalized 
intersections with respect to the traffic condition of Dhaka City, Bangladesh. The saturation flow 
rate for through vehicles were measured using the method described in Road Note 34/196 
(Transportation and Road Research Laboratory, 1963). 
 
2. Study Approach 
 
It is assumed that the ideal saturation flow rate only have an effect of lane width, when other 
factors remain ideal. The linear regression model can be obtained by regressing the average 
saturation flow values with lane width. So, the regression model can be written as in Equation 
(1). 
                                            cbwS                                                                       (1) 
Red Red Green Amber 
R
at
e 
of
 d
is
ch
ar
ge
 o
f q
ue
ue
 in
 
fu
lly
 sa
tu
ra
te
d 
gr
ee
n 
pe
rio
d 
Effective green time 
Saturation flow 
Starting lost time End lost time 
437 
 
   where, S is the measured saturation flow rate in pcuph, w is the lane width in meter and b and c 
is the coefficient to be estimated. 
 
2.1 Data Collection 
 
There are several methods for measuring saturation flow in field and one of the most commonly 
used methods is using video recorder. This method is found to be less accurate if the video image 
is not of top quality and the obscuring of the view of the video camera by a large vehicle in the 
adjacent lane often results in three or four vehicles, especially motorcycles being missed (Cuddon 
and Benneett, 1988). Because of this, the location of video camera is important and suitable sites 
are hard to come by. Therefore, audio cassette recorders were used to collect the data from 
through lanes at several signalized intersection in Dhaka Metropolitan city by using the similar 
fashion of Hossain (2007). 
   The actual time headway between successive vehicles needs to be measured and it was found 
that the observer might not have enough time to record the actual time headway of different 
vehicles passing through the stop line (Lam 1994, Teply and Jones 1991, and Brown and Ogden 
1988). In this study, four categories of vehicles were considered such as passenger car, auto-
rickshaw, bus and minibus. Audio cassette recorders were used to measure the actual time 
headway between successive vehicles, beginning of green interval, the passage of the rear axle of 
each passing vehicle over the stop line as well as the vehicle type, the end of saturation flow, and 
the beginning of amber and red interval. This method was judged to be fast and reasonably 
reliable, particularly as the observer had only a single task to perform in the field (Miller, 1968). 
Lane widths were measured by using a tape. Data were collected during peak periods on week 
day in dry weather when the intersections were saturated. The data were transferred to the 
computer and processed by using especially developed software known as Bancian Ver 2003 
(University Science Malaysia, 2003). 
 
3. Results and Discussions 
 
The saturation flow rate measured in field need to be converted to passenger car unit (PCU) in 
order to take into consideration the effect of mix traffic composition. Passenger Car Unit values 
used to convert saturation flow rate from vehicle per hour (veh/hr) to passenger car unit per hour 
(pcuph) based on the values of Saha et al. (2009) and are as shown in Table 1. 
 
Table 1 PCU factor 
 
Vehicle Categories Passenger Car Unit 
Passenger Car 
Auto-rickshaw 
Minibus 
Bus 
1.00 
0.86 
1.47 
2.16 
 
The average saturation flow rate for various lane widths are as shown in Table 2. 
 
 
 
438 
 
Table 2 Average saturation flow rate 
 
Lane width (m) Saturation flow rate (pcuph) 
3.1 
3.2 
3.3 
3.4 
3.5 
3.6 
3.7 
3.8 
3.9 
4.0 
4.1 
4.2 
4.3 
1763 
1762 
1813 
1852 
1786 
1920 
1890 
1964 
1902 
1954 
1896 
1964 
2010 
 
   The average saturation flow values were regressed with lane widths to obtain the coefficients of 
the equation. The regression analysis was carried out by using the statistical software SPSS Base 
11.5 (SPSS Inc. 2003). The results of the regression analysis i.e. the value of the coefficient, 
standard error of the coefficient corresponding to the independent variable that is entered the 
Equation (1), as well as the t-distribution values and the significance of the factor are shown in 
Table 3. Based on Table 3, at 95% confidence level, the observed significance value for the t-
statistics (0.0001) which is less than 0.05 indicated that the test of the coefficient of zero is 
rejected. 
 
Table 3 Coefficient values for the proposed equation 
 
Variable Co-efficient Std error t-statistic Sig. 
Constant (c) 
Lane width (w) 
1191 
187 
107.76 
28.976 
11.046 
6.458 
0.0001 
0.0001 
 
Based on the regression analysis, the regression model obtained is as shown in Equation (2). 
 
                                                           1191187  wS                                                                (2) 
                                                          791.02 R  
 
   The value of coefficient of determination, R2 (0.791) shows that there is a strong correlation 
between dependent variable and independent variable. However for a satisfactory linear 
regression model, it requires the assumptions that the errors are normally distributed with mean 
zero and constant variance. Therefore, residual analysis was conducted to check for the validity 
439 
 
of these assumptions. The normal probability plot of the residuals for this linear regression 
analysis is as shown in Figure 2. The normal probability plot shows that data points are clustered 
around the diagonal line. This pattern indicates that the residuals are normally distributed.  
 
Figure 2 Normal probability plot for residual 
 
 The residual plot versus predicted value for the linear regression analysis is as shown in Figure 
3. If there are no observation of unusual structure then the variance is constant. Therefore, based 
on the residual plot in Figure 3,  there is no unusual structure and thus variance is constant. 
 
                                              Figure 3 Residual plot Versus Predicted value 
 
Therefore, the derived ideal saturation flow rate for the traffic condition of Dhaka city of 
Bangladesh is S = 187 w + 1191. Consequently, the ideal saturation flow rate that represents the 
road condition of Dhaka city can be calculated by using the Equation (2). For standard lane width 
i.e. 3.6 meters, the ideal saturation flow rate is 1864 pcuphpl. 
 
440 
 
4. Conclusions 
 
This paper has presented the procedure for estimating the ideal saturation flow rate at signalized 
intersection for through vehicles of Dhaka city, Bangladesh. On the basis of the analysis, it is 
found that the saturation flow rate for protected phasing can be estimated by using the equation, S 
= 1191 + 187 w. This result indicates that the saturation flow rate increases as the lane width 
increases and the saturation flow rate that represent the traffic condition of Dhaka city, 
Bangladesh is 1864 pcuphgpl. However, this study is still at the preliminary stage and more data 
are needed in order to improve the ideal saturation flow rate that represents the real traffic 
situation in Bangladesh.   
 
References 
 
Brown, G. E. and Ogden, K. W. (1988). The Effect of Vehicle Category on Traffic Signal Design:     
A Re-Examination of Through Car Equivalents, Proceedings of the 14th ARRB Conference, 
Part 2, pp. 27-37 
Cuddon, A.P. and Bennett, D.W. (1988). Methods of saturation flow measurement. Proceedings 
of    the 14th ARRB Conference, Part 2, Sydney, Australia, pp. 109-117. 
Hossain, Q.S. (2007). Estimation of turning lane adjustment factors at signalized intersections 
according to Malaysian traffic conditions. PhD Thesis, School of Civil Engineering, 
University Science Malaysia, Malaysia. 
Kimber, R.M., McDonald, M. and Hounsell, N.B. (1986). The prediction of saturation flows for 
road junctions controlled by traffic signals. Research report 67, Department of Transport, 
Transportation and Road Research Laboratory, Her Majesty’s Stationery Office, London, pp. 
21-14. 
Lam, W.H.K. (1994). Saturation flows and passenger car equivalents at signalized intersections 
in   Hong Kong. Proceedings of 2nd International Symposium on Highway Capacity (Akcelik, 
R., ed.), Vol. 2, pp. 385-394. 
Miller, A.J. (1968). The capacity of signalized intersections in Australia. Australian Road 
Research Bulletin No. 3, Australian Road Research Board, Melbourne, Australia. 
SPSS Inc. (2003), SPSS Base 11.5, Application Guide, USA. 
Saha, P., Hossain, Q.S., Mahmud, H.M.I. and Islam, M.Z. (2009). Passenger Car Equivalent 
(PCE) of through vehicles at signalized intersections in Dhaka Metropolitan City, Bagladesh, 
Journal of International Association of Traffic and Safety Sciences, Vol. 33, No. 2, pp. 99-104  
Teply, S. and  John, A. M. (1995). Saturation flow: Do we speak the same language? 
Transportation Research Record 1320, Transportation Research Board, National Research 
Council, Washington D.C., U.S.A., pp. 144-153 
Transportation and Road. Research Laboratory (1963). A method for measuring saturation flow 
at traffic signals. Road Note 34/196, Department of Scientific and Industrial Research, Her 
Majesty's Stationery Office, London, pp. 1-13. 
University Science Malaysia (2003). Bancian Users Guide, Highway and Transportation   
Engineering Group (HiTEG), School of Civil Engineering, University Science Malaysia, 
Malaysia.  
Webster, F.V. (1958). Traffic signal settings. Laboratory Technical Paper 39. Road Research  
Laboratory, Crowthorne, U.K 
 
441 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
IMPROVING OPERATIONAL CAPACITY OF APPROACH-ROADS OF ANY BRIDGE 
FOR FUTURE TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT 
 
 
Shohana Iffat1 and Ashfia Siddique2 
 
 
ABSTRACT: Junctions are most vulnerable places. Especially at signalized junctions, right 
turning movement is mainly responsible for congestion and accident. In this highway at each 
junction, 4 right turns and 2 crossings are prevented by continuous divider and 4 left turns and 2 
crossings are allowed. The rest 4 right turns and 2 crossings are done by 2 U-loops at 2 ends. So 
no signal is needed to be introduced. So the flow is continuous and capacity increased by almost 
10 times than signalized junctions. So if the junctions along the length of approaching roads on 
both sides of any bridge or other essential new construction are avoided by constructing a 
superhighway, so in future there will be no risk of capacity exhaustion and also it will reduce the 
accident rate at initial stage. So though the construction is costly, it will be cost effective and one 
of the best solutions of congestion and accident at approach roads. Main necessities of super 
highway near approach road are as all signals are avoided so, there will be no delay. Most 
economic trip will be generated. At initial stage, the traffic volume will be less and speed will be 
very high. So collision will be higher with severity. Super highway can be able to reduce the 
accident rate on a large scale. 
 
1. Super Highway 
 
A superhighway is a highway without any signalized junction along it. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1 Super highway 
                                                        
1Lecturer, CE Department, AUST, Dhaka, Bangladesh. shohanaiffat@yahoo.com  
2Lecturer, CE Department, AUST, Dhaka, Bangladesh. 
442 
 
1.1. Necessity of super highway at approach road 
 
1) No Delay: As all signals are avoided so, there will be no delay. 
2) Economic saving: Most economic trip is generated through super highway. 
3) Safety: At initial stage, the traffic volume will be less and speed will be very high. So collision 
will be higher with severity. Super highway can be able to reduce the accident rate on a large 
scale.  
 
1.2. Pre-requisite for superhighway 
 
1) Super highway should not cross other roads at grade. That means, super highway need be 
arterial road. 
2) If it is necessary to build a primary road or another superhighway across a superhighway, then 
it is required to build it at separate grade. 
3) Sufficient available space is required to construct this highway especially when the 
specialization will be created at grade. 
4) Fund should be available because construction is costly. 
 
1.3. Elements of superhighway 
 
1.3.1. Main elements: 
1) Continuous Divider: To prevent two direct crossing and four right turning movements. 
2) U-Loop: To provide facility for rest two crossing and the four right turns. 
1.3.2. Other elements: 
1) Service Road: Service road serves for local people. For people of local road users (such as 
office going people landed from superhighway etc.), generally two parallel service road is 
provided on both sides of superhighway. 
2) U-Element: The U-shaped element by which four restricted right turning and two restricted 
crossing vehicles move to their destination. Ramps are provided to use these U-loops for 
grade separated U-turn. So it is used to divert the turning traffic to direct traffic. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2 Some elements of super highway 
Service road 
V-Element 
443 
 
3) V-Element: Connecting part of service road and superhighway which is just shaped as V and 
so called as V-element. The functions of V-loop are to increase mobility of service road users so 
that they can move to superhighway. V-element provides this facility. Another function is to 
increase accessibility of superhighway users so that they can move to office or work place, school 
etc. They can use V-element to divert from superhighway to service road 
4) Terminal Roundabout: Normally a super highway ends at a roundabout. Main considerations 
of terminal round about are: 
   i) If two existing junctions are very much close or end of two junctions U-loop meets another 
junction, and then U loop constructed for one may overlap the others.  
   ii) Construction cost will be higher and from architectural point of view it will be less 
impressive. So one round about may be constructed connecting both U-loops.  
   iii) If another super highway needs to cross the first superhighway then four U-loops needed 
to construct which is not economical. So a round-about can be constructed at grade of one 
superhighway and two bridges have to consider and ramps should be constructed for using the 
roundabout by another superhighway users. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3 Other elements of super highway  
 
 
2. Advantages of Super Highway 
 
2.1. General advantages of super highway 
 
1) No signal is required. So no congestion & delay will be produced.  
2) Travel time and vehicle operating cost will be low. So benefit of the construction of super 
highway will be more than cost of this construction. 
3) Overall economic and quick development of the city will be possible within a short time. 
4) Conflict/accident will be minimized because of removal of signalized intersections which are 
hazardous road locations.  
 
 
U-Element 
Ramp 
444 
 
2.2. Special advantage of super highway 
 
Through the continuous divider MRT line can be constructed in future which is the fastest transit 
system, carrying large number of people in a shortest possible time. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4 MRT 
 
 
3. U-loops in Super Highway   
 
There are two types of U-loops use in super highway. At grade U-loop where the U-loop is at 
ground and grade separated U-loop where the U-loop is over or below the ground. 
 
3.1. At grade U-loop’s suitability 
 
1) This is suitable for rural area (open area). Because land space is available there to provide 
sufficient space and turning radius to construct at-grade U-turn facility.  
2) The flow volume should be low at road. Because when flow volume is very much higher 
generally grade separation is needed in that case. In rural area volume is lower than urban area. 
 
3.2. At-grade U-loop’s advantages 
 
1) It is economic. 
2) No need to move against gravitational force. 
3) Quick movement is possible 
 
3.3. At-grade U-loop’s disadvantages 
 
1) For this type of U-loop, turning vehicles need to use right most lane which is highest speed 
lane. So for merging & diverging action there is possibility of conflict. So it is not safe. 
2) Large vehicles go to another lane (weaving action) for larger turning radius and create 
445 
 
congestion problem. So larger area is required for this type of U-loop. 
3) Vehicles from service road cannot use the loop directly. They need to enter into superhighway 
and then can use it.  
 
3.4. Considerations for at grade U-loop construction 
 
1) Flow volume should be small and the area needs to be open area (rural). 
2) In this type interchange to use U-loop it is needed to take right turning from the right lane 
which is highest velocity lane. So exclusive right turning lane option should be provided to 
reduce accident risk and also reduce congestion. 
3) Sufficient land requisition is necessary for constructing this type interchange. 
4) Turning radius should be sufficient. 
 
3.5. Grade separated U-loop’s suitability 
 
1) When flow volume is too much higher, then grade separation is needed. As volume of urban 
area is larger than rural area so it is suitable for urban area. 
2) It is suitable for urban area (Built up area). Because there is insufficient land space available 
for large number of existing structures. 
 
3.6. Grade separated U-loop’s advantages 
 
1) For this type of U-loop, turning vehicles need not to use right most lane which is highest speed 
lane. They have to use left lane which is lowest speed lane. So for merging & diverging action 
there is no possibility of conflict. So it is safer. 
2) Larger area is not required for this type of U-loop because the loop is needed to construct at 
separate grade. 
 
3.7. Grade separated U-loop’s disadvantages 
 
1) Grade separation is costly. 
2) Have to move against gravitational force, so speed reduces. 
3) Quick movement is not possible. 
 
3.8. Considerations for grade separated U-loop construction 
 
1) Flow volume should be high and the area needs to be built-up area (urban). 
2) Turing radius should be kept sufficient so that sharp bending could not occur. 
3) Longitudinal slope will be minimum because have to move against gravity. Otherwise speed 
will be reduced and as a result productivity will be less. 
4) Exclusive left lane is required for continuous merging and diverging action of U-loop users. 
 
 
4. Conclusions 
 
Superhighway increases both physical and operational capacity of a road. It reduces delay and 
saves travel time. It is also safer. So it is preferable to construct to handle a large volume of traffic 
446 
 
that will appear in that road in future. Though construction is costly, the value of travel time is 
larger than congestion cost and accident cost, so finally the benefit will be higher than the cost. 
So the not only developed countries but also the developing countries may use this concept. 
 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
The author wishes to express her deepest gratitude and sincere appreciation to Dr. Shamsul 
Haque, Professor of Department of Civil Engineering, BUET, for the guidance and suggestions, 
which were extremely helpful on accomplishing this study which was the part of a M.Sc. 
assignment. 
 
 
References 
 
Conley C. (1968), Low Energy Transit Orbits in the Restricted Three Body Problem. 
Bais Harsh Pal, (January 2004), How plants communicate using the underground information 
superhighway, Trends in Plant Science. 
Corsi R. Jerome (June 12, 2006), Bush Administration Quietly Plans NAFTA Super Highway. 
 
 
 
 
447 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
INVESTIGATION OF BOND STRENGTH OF BAMBOO AND BAMBOO TWIG WITH 
CONCRETE AS A POTENTIAL REINFORCEMENT 
 
 
Md Ahsan Sabbir1, Saiada Fuadi Fancy2 and Kashif Mahmud3 
 
 
ABSTRACT: This research was undertaken to investigate the possibility of using bamboo and 
bamboo twig as a potential reinforcement in the concrete beam to compensate the low tensile 
property of the concrete. Even though steel reinforcement is a very suitable material for 
complementing concrete’s low tensile strength, considering the cost, some parts of the world 
people build their houses by using only concrete or mud-brick which is very vulnerable. To 
overcome these problems, bamboo may be the alternative materials to substitute the reinforcing 
bar in concrete for less important structures by investigating the results of these types of 
reinforced beams. For this, the determination of bond strength with concrete of these natural 
materials is a very important physical property. Nine pull out tests were performed for both 
bamboo and bamboo twig specimen to determine the bond strength. In these pullout tests, three 
samples were in natural condition, three samples were coated with tar for water proofing and 
three samples were coated with tar along with pierced nails at the ends to enhance the bond 
strength. From this test, bond strength of bamboo and bamboo twig was determined. The average 
bond strength of bamboo specimen and bamboo twig specimen decreases by coated with tar but 
the bond strength increases when pierced nails are used with coated tar. By using pierced nails at 
the ends the two specimens experienced tension failure. Due to the presence of knot, the bond 
strength of bamboo twig is found elevated than the bamboo specimen in its natural condition. The 
bond strength of bamboo specimen is found elevated than the bamboo twig specimen, when 
pierced nails are used at the ends. From these investigations it can be opined that bamboo 
specimen coated with tar along with pierced nails is most suitable for bonding with concrete.  
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
One of the properties that would make bamboo and bamboo twig a good substitute to steel in 
reinforced concrete is its strength. The strength of bamboo and bamboo twig is greater than many 
timber products which are advantageous, but it is quite less than the tensile and bond strength of 
steel. Bamboo is easily accessible as it is available in almost every tropical and subtropical 
regions, this lowers the cost of construction and increases the strength of the buildings that would 
                                                        
1Senior Lecturer, Department of Civil Engineering, Stamford University Bangladesh, Dhaka, Bangladesh. 
asabbir@stamforduniversity.edu.bd  
2Lecturer, Department of Civil Engineering, Stamford University Bangladesh, Dhaka, Bangladesh.  
sfancy_cee@yahoo.com 
3Assistant Professor, Department of Civil & Environmental Engineering, Islamic University of Technology 
(IUT), Gazipur-1704, Bangladesh. Rusho_mahmud@yahoo.com 
448 
 
otherwise be unreinforced.  In any reinforced concrete member, bonding between reinforcement 
and concrete is very important. Currently deformed bars are used widely for improving the 
bonding. Conversely bamboo and bamboo twig have a smooth and slippery surface and therefore 
bonding may be a critical factor for this kind of specimen. Therefore, it was decided to 
investigate the bond strength of finished bamboo and bamboo twig by performing pull out test. 
 
 
2. Previous Study 
 
Whereas the mechanical properties and behavior of steel reinforcement have been thoroughly 
studied and well documented, there exists no comprehensive data describing bamboo and 
bamboo twig reinforcement. Therefore, the aim of this study is to provide a preliminary 
contribution toward the collection of the mechanical properties and behaviors of bamboo and 
bamboo twig reinforcement. Some of the previous researches are mentioned in connection with 
this. The mechanical properties vary with height and age of the bamboo culm. Research findings 
indicate that the strength of bamboo increases with age. The optimum strength value occurs 
between 2.5 and 4 years. The strength decreases at a later age (Amada and Untao , 2001). Amada 
et al. (1997) investigated the mechanical and physical properties of bamboo. They conducted a 
thorough investigation into the structure and purposes of the nodes, which they found to 
strengthen the bamboo culm (Amada et al., 1997). Lo et al. (2004) gave a detailed description of 
the mechanical properties of bamboo in their study. They found that the physical, as well as 
mechanical attributes vary  with  respect  to  diameter,  length,  age,  type,  position  
along  culms, and  moisture content of bamboo (Lo et al., 2004). Amada and Untao (2001) 
studied the fracture properties of bamboo. In contradiction to other studies, this study states that 
the tensile strength of bamboo fibers almost corresponds to that of steel (Amada and Untao, 
2001). Ghavami (1995) discussed the mechanical properties of bamboo, specifically pertaining to 
bamboo in concrete. This study showed that the ultimate strength of a concrete beam reinforced 
with bamboo is approximately 4 times when compared with un-reinforced concrete (Ghavami, 
1995). 
 
3. Bond Strength  
 
Structural performance of reinforced concrete members depends on the bond between concrete 
and the reinforcement. So the knowledge of bond behaviour between reinforcing steel and 
concrete is critical to the design of reinforced concrete structures. Bond behaviour is the 
interaction of the reinforcing bar with the concrete. The transfer of axial force from a reinforcing 
bar to the surrounding concrete results in the development of tangential stress components along 
the contact surface. The stress acting parallel to the bar along the interface is called bond stress 
(Pillai and Kirk, 1983). Bond ensures that there is little or no slip of the steel relative to the 
concrete and the means by which stress is transferred across the steel-concrete (Warner et. Al., 
1998).Bond resistance is governed by several factors such as compressive and tensile strengths of 
concrete, the concrete cover to the bar, confinement due to transverse reinforcement, surface 
condition of the bar and bar geometry (Esfahani and Rangan, 1998, Orangun et. Al., 1977, and 
Darwin et. al., 1996). Bond resistance is made up of chemical adhesion, friction and mechanical 
interlock between the bar and surrounding concrete. In the plain bars, only the first two of these 
components contribute to the bond strength. In the deformed bars, the surface protrusions or ribs 
interlocking with and bearing against the concrete key formed between the ribs contribute more 
449 
 
positively to bond strength, and is the major reason for their superior bond effectiveness (Pillai 
and Kirk, 1983). The average interfacial stress is given by 
τ =  
 
(1) 
where τ is the average interfacial stress, F is the tensile load, D is the diameter of the 
reinforcement and L is the bonded length. 
The design provisions of reinforced concrete as a composite material utilize the bond strength 
between the two materials. So, it is necessary to understand the bond properties between bamboo 
and bamboo twig with concrete. 
 
 
4. Pullout Test 
 
For reinforced concrete member, bonding between reinforcement and concrete is the most 
important factor. Pull out test has been performed to determine the bond strength between 
bamboo reinforcement and surrounding concrete. Consequently, it was decided to investigate the 
bond strength of bamboo and bamboo twig through pull out test. Three samples were taken in 
natural condition, three samples were coated with tar and three samples were taken coated with 
tar and pierced nail with a length of 762 mm to 1067 mm were taken for pullout test. 
 
 
5. Sample Preparation 
This article describes the general preparation of both bamboo and bamboo twig for this test. 
 
5.1 Preparation Bamboo Specimen 
 
First a bamboo was divided into two piece length wise as shown in Figure 1 with the carpenter’s 
tools like hammer, chisel etc. Each of the two halves was further divided into three pieces as 
shown in the Figure 2. It was then cleaned and finally rounded to shape of a rod as shown in 
Figure 3 and Figure 4.  
 
5.2 Preparation of Bamboo Twig Specimen 
 
Bamboo twig is naturally round in shape. Therefore, it was used directly in its natural shape as 
shown in the Figure 5. 
  
Figure 1 Hammering bamboo with a chisel Figure 2 Bamboo splitting into two pieces 
450 
 
 
 
Figure 3 Preparation of sample bamboo by 
using fem 
Figure 4 Prepared bamboo sample as 
reinforcement 
 
 
Figure 5 Bamboo twig specimen 
 
 
6.  Preparation of Specimen for Pull-out Test 
 
The following procedure was followed in preparation of bamboo specimens for pull out test 
 
6.1  Bamboo specimen preparation: 
 
i. The length of specimens is between 762 and 1067 mm. 
ii. Any form of weak and decayed portions was avoided. 
iii. The diameter of each specimen was measured at three locations using Slide Calipers and 
the average values were calculated. 
iv. Three samples were taken in natural condition as shown in the Figure 6 
v. Three bamboo samples were coated with tar. Bamboo is a natural object and there is a 
possibility of decomposition when it comes in contact with water in concrete. For this 
reason tar was used as a protective cover which is shown in Figure 7 
vi. Three bamboo samples were taken coated with tar and pierced nail. When tar will be 
used as a protective cover it may decrease the bond strength between the bamboo and 
concrete. To increase the bond strength pierced nails were used. At first the samples were 
drilled by a drill machine at an interval of 1 in and the adjacent holes are right angle to 
one another. The samples were drilled to protect the specimen from splitting. Then the 
nails were hammered through the holes. The finished sample is shown in Figure 8. 
vii. The tar was allowed to dry for 3 days. 
451 
 
viii. The bamboo specimens were placed concentrically in the cylinder (102 mm diameter and 
203 mm height) with a clear gap of 25 mm at the bottom. 
ix. After proper placing of the bamboo specimen in the mould, the concrete of mix ratio 
1:1.5:3 was allowed to pour.   
x. The specimens were removed from the molds after 24 hrs and cured in water for 28 days  
xi. After curing for 28 days, the specimens were tested for bond strength using pull out test 
machine. The specimens were placed on the lower platen of the testing machine and the 
upper platen was used for gripping the bamboo specimen. The edges were wringed with 
GI wire for proper gripping. For uniform distribution of load, a steel plate with a geo 
textile membrane was used at the upper portion of the specimen as shown in the Figure 9. 
 
   
 
Figure 6 Bamboo sample 
(in natural condition) for 
pullout test. 
 
Figure 7 Bamboo sample coated 
with tar 
 
Figure 8 Finished bamboo 
sample (coated with tar and 
pierced nail) 
 
6.2  Preparation of Bamboo Twig Specimen: 
 
The factors considered in preparation of bamboo twig specimen are given below: 
 
i. The length of the bamboo twig specimen was between 762 mm and 1067 mm. 
ii. Only straight portion of bamboo twig was chosen as specimens for testing. Any form of 
imperfection or decayed portion was avoided. 
iii. The outer diameter of each specimen was measured by slide calipers at three locations and 
the average values were calculated. 
iv. The remaining process required is preparation of bamboo twigs specimens are similar to 
the finished bamboo which are already discussed earlier. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
452 
 
7.  Pullout Test Results of Bamboo Specimen 
 
Result of pullout test for bamboo specimens are given below- 
 
Table 1 Bond test results for bamboo specimen 
 
Specimen 
no. 
Sample 
condition 
Avg. 
dia 
(mm) 
Bonded 
length 
(mm) 
Failure 
Load 
(kN) 
Failure 
stress 
(MPa) 
Avg. 
failure 
stress 
(MPa) 
Failure type 
11 Natural 15 191 13.3 1.5  Pull out 
failure 
12 Natural 18 191 16 1.5 1.3 Pull out and 
splitting 
failure 
13 Natural 17 191 13 1.3  Pull out 
failure 
21 Coated 
with tar 
20 191 12 1.0  Pull out and 
splitting 
failure 
22 Coated 
with tar 
20 191 10 0.8 1.2 Pull out and 
splitting 
failure 
23 Coated 
with tar and 
pierced nail 
15 191 16 1.8  Pull out and 
splitting 
failure 
31 Coated 
with tar and 
pierced nail 
19 191 26 2.3  Splitting 
failure 
32 Coated 
with tar and 
pierced nail 
19 191 21 1.9 2.2 Splitting 
failure 
33 Coated 
with tar and 
pierced nail 
15 191 22 2.4  Failure of 
specimen 
 
From the test results it can be concluded that the average bond failure stress is lower for 
specimens coated with tar to protect it from decomposition. In this case the decrease is about 8%. 
To increase the bond strength pierced nails were used with coated surface. The strength increase 
in this case is 69% compare to its natural condition. Figure 10, Figure 11 and Figure 12 shows the 
test samples with natural condition. The failure in this case is due to the slippage between the 
specimen and concrete surface. Figure 13, Figure 14 and Figure 15 shows the test samples which 
were coated with tar to protect it from decomposition due to moisture. In this case bond failure 
occurs due to slippage between the smooth surface of the bamboo specimen with tar and the 
453 
 
surrounding concrete. Figure 16, Figure 17 and Figure 18 shows the test samples with pierced nails 
which were also coated with tar. In this case none of the sample failed by slipping. The failure 
mode in this case was splitting type. 
 
 
 
During test After test 
Figure 10 Typical pullout failure of bamboo (sample-11) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
During test After test 
Figure 11 Typical pullout and split failure of bamboo (sample-12) 
454 
 
  
During test After test 
Figure 12 Typical pullout failure of bamboo (sample-13) 
 
 
 
 During test    After test 
Figure 13 Typical pullout and splitting failure of bamboo (sample-21) 
 
 
 During test    After test 
Slip 
455 
 
Figure 14 Typical pullout and splitting failure of bamboo (sample-22) 
  
 
 During test    After test 
Figure 15 Typical pullout and splitting failure of bamboo (sample-23) 
  
 During test    After test 
Figure 16 Typical splitting failure of bamboo (sample-31) 
 
 
 During test    After test 
456 
 
Figure 17 Typical splitting failure of bamboo (sample-32) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 During test    After test 
Figure 18 Typical bamboo failure of bamboo (sample-33) 
 
8.  Pullout Test Results of Bamboo Twig Specimen 
 
Pullout test results of bamboo twig specimens are given below- 
 
Table 2 Bond test results for bamboo twig specimen 
 
Specimen 
No. 
Sample 
Condition 
Avg. 
Dia 
(mm) 
Bonded 
Length 
(mm) 
Failure 
Load 
(kN) 
Stress 
at 
Failure 
(MPa) 
Avg. 
Stress 
at 
Failure 
(MPa) 
Failure type 
11 Natural 17 191 14 1.4  Pull out and 
splitting failure 
12 Natural 17 191 14.6 1.4 1.4 Pull out failure 
13 Natural 16 191 15 1.6  Pull out and 
splitting failure 
21 Coated with 
tar 
18 191 13.9 1.3  Pull out and 
splitting failure 
22 Coated with 
tar 
17 191 10 1.0 1.3 Pull out and 
splitting failure 
23 Coated with 
tar 
15 191 14 1.6  Pull out and 
splitting failure 
31 Coated with 
tar and pierced 
nail 
18 191 21.7 2  Splitting 
failure 
32 Coated with 
tar and pierced 
nail 
17 191 17.8 1.7 1.8 
 
Splitting 
failure 
457 
 
33 Coated with 
tar and pierced 
nail 
13 191 14.3 1.8  Failure of 
specimen 
 
From the test results it can be concluded that the average bond failure stress is lower for 
specimens coated with tar to protect it from decomposition. In this case the decrease is about 7%. 
To increase the bond strength pierced nails were used with coated surface. The strength increase 
in this case is 38% compare to its natural condition. Figure 19, Figure 20 and Figure 21 shows the 
test samples with natural condition. The failure in this case is due to the slippage between the 
specimen and concrete surface. Figure 22, Figure 23 and Figure 24 shows the test samples which 
were coated with tar to protect it from decomposition due to moisture. In this case bond failure 
occurs due to slippage between the smooth surface of the bamboo specimen with tar and the 
surrounding concrete. Figure 25, Figure 26 and Figure 27 shows the test samples with pierced 
nails which were also coated with tar. In this case none of the sample failed by slipping. The 
failure mode in this case was splitting type. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
During test After test 
Figure 19 Typical pullout and splitting failure of bamboo twig (sample-11) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
During test After test 
Slip 
458 
 
Figure 20 Typical pullout failure of bamboo twig (sample-12) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
During test After test 
Figure 21 Typical pullout and splitting failure of bamboo twig (sample-13) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
During test After test 
Figure 22 Typical pullout and splitting failure of bamboo twig (sample-21) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
During test After test 
slip 
459 
 
Figure 23 Typical pullout and splitting failure of bamboo twig (sample-22) 
 
 
 
During test After test 
Figure 24 Typical pullout and splitting failure of bamboo twig (sample-23) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
During test After test 
Figure 25 Typical splitting failure of bamboo twig (sample-31) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
During test After test 
Figure 26 Typical splitting failure of bamboo twig (sample-32) 
460 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
During test After test 
 
Figure 27 Typical bamboo twig splitting failure of (sample-33) 
 
9.  Conclusions 
(i) The average bond strength of bamboo specimen decreases when coated with tar but the 
bond strength increases significantly when pierced nails are used with coated tar. The 
same results were observed for bamboo twig specimen. 
(ii)  The bamboo and bamboo twig specimens experienced tension failure when pierced nails 
are used at the ends. 
(iii) The bond strength of bamboo twig is found to be higher than the bamboo specimen in its 
natural condition due to the presence of knot. 
(iv) When pierced nails are used at the ends, the bond strength of bamboo specimen is found 
to be higher than the bamboo twig specimen.  
Acknowledgements 
 
The authors are thankful to Professor Dr. Sk. Sekender Ali of Department of Civil Engineering, 
Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technology for his valuable suggestions, consultations 
and continuous inspiration 
 
References 
 
Amada, S., Lchikawa, Y., Munekata, T., Nagase, Y. and Shimizu, H., (1997)., “Fiber Texture and 
Mechanical Graded Structure of Bamboo”, Composites Part B, Vol.288, pp 13-20. 
Amada, S. and Untao, S., (2001), “Fracture Properties of Bamboo”, Composites Part B. Vol. 32, 
pp 451-459. 
Darwin, D., Tholen, M.L., Idun, E.K. and Zuo, J., (1996), ACI Structural Journal Vol. 93, pp. 
347-359.  
Esfahani, M.R. and Rangan, B.V., (1998), ACI Structural Journal, Vol. 95, pp. 272 – 280.  
461 
 
Ghavami, K., (1995), “Ultimate Load Behavior of Bamboo-Reinforced Lightweight Concrete 
Beams”, Cement & Concrete Composites, Vol. 17, pp 281-288 
Lo, Cuo, Leung ,(2004), “The Effect of Fiber Density on Strength Capacity of Bamboo”, 
Materials Letter, vol. 58, pp. 2595-2598. 
Orangun, C. O., Jirsa, J. O. and Breen, J. E., (1977),  ACI Journal, March, pp. 114-122 
Pillai,S. U., and Kirk, D. W.,(1983), Reinforced Concrete Design in Canada, McGraw-Hill. 
Rangan, R. F., B. V., Hall, A. S., and Faulkes, K. A.,(1998), Concrete Structures, Longman, 
Australia. 
.  
  
 
 462 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
INVESTIGATION ON FAILURE OF SHORE PROTECTIVE WORK ALONG MARINE 
DRIVE ROAD AT COX’S BAZAR 
 
 
Md. Ataur Rahman1 and  Md. Nasimul Hoque Chowdhury2  
 
 
ABSTRACT: The marine drive road in Cox’s Bazar connecting Kalatoli to Inani is located on a 
landscape of highly complex posture reflecting a dynamic interaction between land and sea. The 
proposed 80 km long road from Cox’s Bazar to Teknaf along the sandy beach was originally 
conceptualized in 1993 to entice the tourists from home and abroad through presenting a stunning 
view of the Bay of Bengal on one side and lush green hills on the other. In the first phase a 24 km 
road from Kalatoli to Inani has been constructed. To protect this important communication link, 
shore protection work was accomplished at the sea side slope and where the sea appreciably 
closes to the road, which was completed on the year 2008. But in the following year 2009, 
protective work started to fail at some points in between 7.00 km to 10.00 km from Kalatoli, 
close to Himchari. The main purpose of this study was to investigate the reasons associate with 
the failure and also to recommend a revised design for the protection work overcoming with 
previous lacking if found. The investigation found four most probable reasons associated with the 
failure. The study also redesigns the protection work with different type of armor units including 
Tetrapod, Coreloc and Xbloc. The new design overcomes previous lacking and also copes with 
applied costal practice. 
 
 
1. Background 
 
Cox’s Bazar is the most attractive tourist place in Bangladesh featuring the longest sandy sea 
beach of the world having length of 125 km. It is the best tourist spot in Bangladesh visited by a 
large number of tourists from home and abroad each year. One of its subdistrict named Teknaf 
forms the southernmost point in mainland which is connected with Myanmar by a small river 
called Naf River. St. Martin, the only coral island of the country, is a small island in the northeast 
part of the Bay of Bengal about 9 km south of the Cox's Bazar-Teknaf peninsular tip. Because of 
unexplainable scenic beauty this island has become another tourist’s paradise of the country. The 
picturesque exquisiteness, natural resources and geographical features make it to be the area with 
cosmic economic potential. To exploit these potentials into a major contributor of economy for 
the region and the country, a well communication link and accessibility have to be considered 
which would reduce travel hours from Cox’s Bazar to Teknaf and Saint Martin’s Island.  
                                                        
1Associate Professor, Dept. of Water Resources Engineering, BUET, Dhaka-1000, Bangladesh,          
Email: mataur@wre.buet.ac.bd 
2Graduate Student, Dept. of Water Resources Engineering, BUET, Dhaka-1000, Bangladesh. 
 463 
   The marine drive, an 80-km long road along the sandy beach connecting Cox’s Bazar to 
Teknaf, has originally been conceptualized in 1993 to encourage tourists from home and abroad 
through providing them a spectacular view of the Bay of Bengal on one side and lush green hills 
on the other, which would reduce travel hours from Cox’s Bazar to Teknaf and Saint Martin’s 
Island. The first phase of this project includes the construction of road from Kalatoli to Inani 
measuring about 24 km (Figure 1). The construction works was started in 1994. In 2000 the then 
government took the shore protection works along the right bank of this road as a separate project 
and the Engineer corps of Bangladesh Army was given the responsibility to implement the 
project. 
 
   The areas near the Cox’s Bazar town are located directly in the high risk area for surge water 
waves as well as landslides. Construction of marine drive road was accompanied with shore 
protection works on the sea side slope of the road to compensate the effect of severe wave action 
and erosion appreciably near the road (Figure 2). In 2008, the project was completed and opened 
for the subsequent use. The design was prepared by Bangladesh Water Development Board 
(BWDB) and followed for implementation under 17 ECB, Bangladesh Army. 
 
Figure 2 Shore protection works along marine drive road 
Figure 1 Marine Drive Road, Cox’s Bazar 
 464 
   Soon after completion of the construction, at least one km of the shore protection works along 
the marine drive has been devoured by the Bay of Bengal at Kalatoli, while erosion has gobbled 
up parts of the marine drive near Himchhari, Sabrang and some other places. Coastal erosion 
started at the end of 2008 and protection works started to fail from the year 2009 and it’s still 
under danger. The protection works have failed at some specific region severe in between 
chainage 7.00 km to 10.00 km measured from Kalatoli. The failure of the protective works has 
been propagated to such extent that protection is now malfunctioned and washed away in some 
region. Due to natural encroachment and erosion process of the sea beach, new areas of the 
marine drive road have been affected under severe wave action. In some section of the road, geo-
bags and geo-tubes are placed to withstand temporary damages (Figure 3). 
 
   The objectives of this study are to investigate the reasons associated with the failure in the 
protective work and redesigning the protective work with different type armor unit. Investigation 
phase of this study is comprised of dealing with basic coastal engineering knowledge, 
understanding present condition, wave mechanism, theoretical basis and applied typical coastal 
protection works. Study also includes visiting the study area for visual inspection, collecting 
existing design data, analyzing data, interpreting the results; compare the results with most 
common practices in coastal engineering. The final step of the study is to redesign the protection 
work with latest and efficient coastal armor alternatives compromising previous lacks and also 
compensating coastal practices around the world. 
  
 
2. Review of the Shore Protection Works 
 
Feasibility report on Cox’s Bazar–Teknaf Marine Drive Road Project (2003) describes features of 
the marine drive road and its corresponding significance. It identifies two categories of slope 
protection systems for the whole marine drive. First category consists of anchored earth slope 
protection system having hard concrete facings. This system is required where the slopes are 
close to the sea and are likely to be subjected to severe wave action. The second category differs 
from the first category in replacing the hard concrete facing panels with flexible brick-bat filled 
Figure 3 Existing condition of the protective works 
 465 
gabion wire baskets. This system is designed for implementation in the slopes where sea is 
considerably away and chances of severe wave action are less. The design drawings for the shore 
protection collected from BWDB facilitated to comprehend and analyze the proposed and 
existing design. Sea side slope was protected by Concrete Cube Blocks as armor unit. C.C. 
Blocks was proposed to have 21 days of curing before placement, mix ratio of 1:3:6 for cement, 
sand and aggregate and Cylinder strength of 9.0 N/mm2. The design recommended gradual and 
smooth transitions at the end and at the starting of the revetments joining with unprotected area or 
previous revetment works. The top level of the protective works was the same as the existing 
metallic road. Regular monitoring was recommended accompanied with the completion of the 
proposed protective works. Any displacement or sliding of C.C. blocks in the slope and launching 
part or any abnormal scour at the end of the launching apron of the completed work was 
recommended to record and to report to the Design Circle–4, BWDB for necessary action. 
   The coast of Bangladesh is approximately 710 km long. A series of coastal polders were 
constructed between mid-sixties and mid seventies in order to limit saline water intrusion and 
thus improve conditions for agriculture and support an increasing population. Several attempts 
have been made in the past to protect the embankment against wave erosion including stone 
armor, steel slag, brickwork and placed concrete blocks of various thickness. Sharmin (2009) 
conducted a study resembling concentration on the coastal areas of Bangladesh to assess the risks 
and vulnerabilities of the coastal zone and also the available coastal protection works. It also 
concluded that the maximum wave height at the eastern coast is more than 2.5m. A better 
understanding of the near shore physics, wave mechanics and failure modes needs to be first 
before analyzing any coastal problems. In this particular investigation the primary references 
were taken as Coastal Engineering Manual (2010) and Shore Protection Manual (1984) by US 
Army Corps of Engineers, a comprehensive technical manual including basic principles of 
coastal processes, geology, and hydrodynamics, methods for computing coastal planning and 
design parameters, and guidance on how to formulate coastal flood studies, shore protection, and 
navigation projects. 
   Redesign phase of study is carried out by studying a number of design manuals, reference 
books, and journals reviewed and extensive study of the related sections. ‘Design of Coastal 
Revetments, Seawalls, and Bulkheads’ by US Army Corps of Engineers (1995) endowed with 
vast methodologies, considerations and design concerning various armor units such as Tetrapod, 
Xbloc, Coreloc etc.  ‘Design of Revetments’ by K.W. Pilarczyk (1998) provided necessary 
guidelines for the design of the revetments with Concrete Cube Blocks. Internet based references 
of Delta Marine Consultants presented an overview of the detail design by Xbloc armor unit. 
Several other related research papers, journals and books were studied including ‘Design 
Formulas for Block Revetments’ by Bezuijen and Breteler (1996). 
 
 
3. Investigation on Failure of Shore Protection Works 
 
Coastal project elements fail for one or more of the following reasons: 
 Design failure occurs when either the structure as a whole, including its foundation, or 
individual structure components cannot withstand load conditions within the design 
criteria. Design failure also occurs when the structure does not perform as anticipated. 
 Load exceedance failure occurs because anticipated design load conditions were 
exceeded. 
 Construction failure arises due to incorrect or bad construction or construction materials. 
 466 
 Deterioration failure is the result of structure deterioration and lack of project 
maintenance.                                                                        
   Investigation has been carried out to find out the most probable reason associated with the 
failure and also to make a clear conception of that failure mechanism. The outcome of this 
investigation is stated as follows.  
 
Existing Design: The shore protection works along the Marine Drive Road from Kalatoli to Inani 
(24 km) was designed by Design Circle-4 of Bangladesh Water Development Board in 2002. The 
parameters considered during design and the design outputs are given below.  
 
Design wave height:  2m 
Road level varies from 4.50 to 6.50 m , PWD 
Existing GL within the working area varies from 2.0 to 4.0 m, PWD 
Wind speed : 30 m/s 
Type of soil :  Sandy 
Soil  size (d50) under layer:    d50 = 0.37 mm 
Size of cubical c.c block: 600mm x 600mm x 400mm at slope, 600mm x 600mm x 400mm at 
key. 
Geotextile:    Thickness   > 3.00 mm 
                     Mass   >  350 gm/m2 
                     Strip tensile strength  >  25kN/m2  
                                 Effective opening   < 0.08 mm  
Filter sand below geotextile:  150mm thick sand with FM > 1.50 
Slope of the Protection:       1V:4H 
Slope of the Bathymetry:     About  1V:3H  in 4.00 km point 
                                             About 1V:3.75H in 17.50 km point 
                                             About 1V: 6H in 10.00 km point 
A typical cross section of the designed shore protection work is shown in Figure 4.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4 A typical cross section of the designed shore protection work along marine drive road 
at Cox’s Bazar 
 467 
As investigation process progressed more in depth information was acquired. The study finds the 
most probable reason associated with the failure as follows: 
 Discrepancy in design considerations 
 Inappropriate Toe protection 
 Inadequate sub-soil filter layer 
 Inappropriate selection of armor unit. 
 
3.1. Discrepancy in design considerations 
 
Wave is one of the major parameter to cause the failure in shore protection works. Waves are 
characterized by their height and period. Higher waves and longer periods are associated with 
stronger forces and a higher potential for run up and overtopping. There are three basic types of 
waves: non-breaking, breaking and broken waves. While water level changes may not affect the 
non-breaking wave characteristics, the breaking wave characteristics are dependent on the depth 
of water and bed slope. The breaking waves most often exert higher forces than non-breaking 
waves. Broken waves are usually associated with the smallest forces.  
   In many cases one has to estimate the distribution of wave heights at a certain location without 
access to a measured time series of surface elevation from a wave gauge. A time series of the 
significant wave height can be obtained by a numerical calculation of the energy transfer from the 
wind to the waves. This method requires a time series of the wind velocity at each grid point in 
the numerical model. In most cases it is very expensive to obtain these time series, because the 
pressure from historic weather maps has to be digitized. However, at many locations wind 
velocities has been observed over many years and they are reported as a frequency distribution 
depending on speed and direction. From these data it is possible to estimate extreme velocities by 
fitting eg. a Weibull-distribution to the data. If wind speed is linked to wave height in a unique 
way, the wind speed distribution could be transformed to a wave height distribution. If the 
upwind fetch is less than, say, 200-300 km, the methods based on the so called SPM-method 
described in Shore Protection Manual (1984), are believed to give a reasonable wave height 
distribution at a given location. 
   There is no measurement of the near shore wave height along the marine drive road from 
Kalatoli to Inani. However, the historical wind velocities data and the bathymetry data are 
available at this site and the critical wave height could be estimated from these data. But it is 
found that no such analysis has been done during the design of the revetment type shore 
protection works along marine drive road. A lump sump value of 2m wave height has been 
considered to calculate the c.c. block size used as shore protection armor units. The 17 ECB of 
Bangladesh army, who are taking care to withstand the failure of this shore protection works, 
claimed a 3m wave height at critical state at the failure site based on their field observation. So it 
reveals that there is a discrepancy in considering the wave height during the design phase. 
 
3.2. Inappropriate toe protection 
 
The function of a toe berm is to support the main armor layer and to prevent damage resulting 
from scour. Armor units displaced from the armor layer may come to rest on the toe berm, thus 
increasing toe berm stability. Toe berms are normally constructed of quarry-run, but concrete 
blocks can be used if quarry-run material is too small or unavailable. Figure 5 featuring marine 
drive shore protection work was photographed in 2009. It illustrates that, the failure initiated with 
the formation scour holes close to the foot of the structure followed up by heaving of the toe 
 468 
berm armor units. Toe berm stability is affected by wave height, water depth at the top of the toe 
berm, width of the toe berm, and block density. However, wave steepness does not appear to be a 
critical toe berm stability parameter. These phenomena can be referred to as ‘Flow Sliding’ of the 
armor units which occurs mainly because of the toe berm erosion and scour holes in the shoulder 
of the Toe. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.3. Inadequate sub-soil filter layer 
 
In coastal engineering, filter layers are defined as layers that protect the underlying base material 
or soil from erosion by waves and currents without excessive buildup of pore pressure in the 
underlying material. Filter functions can be achieved using either one or more layers of 
granulated material such as gravel or small stone of various grain sizes, geotextile fabric, or a 
combination of geotextile overlaid with granulated material. In marine drive shore protection 
work, the design wave height was taken as 2.0 m. Blocks were placed directly on geotextile along 
slope of 1:4 above a 150 mm thick sand of Fineness Modulus greater than 1.50 ( Figure 6). 
   The use of relatively open top layers directly on sand body (with geotextile in between) is 
restricted to wave height of Hs = 1.2 m. Good compaction of sand is essential to avoid sliding or 
even liquefaction. For loads higher than Hs = 1.2 m a well graded layer of stone on a geotextile is 
recommendable (Figure 7). Stone layer of 0.2 m – 0.3 m thickness should be used for 1.2 < Hs < 
2.5 m., which was not maintained at marine drive shore protection works. 
 
3.4. Inappropriate selection of armor unit  
 
Shore protection works in the marine drive road was accomplished with the design of revetments 
of concrete cube blocks. Following are the some guidelines given in “Coastal Protection” edited 
by K.W. Pilarczyk. More sophisticated approach of these can be found in the guidelines on 
‘Design of Revetments’ (Pilarczyk 1998). 
 The edges of the adjacent block-mats, if not properly connected to each other, should be 
treated as free blocks. 
Figure 5 Flow slide observed in the protective works along the marine drive road in 2009 
 469 
 For slopes steeper than 1 on 3, the geotechnical stability can be a decisive factor. 
 In case of top layer placed directly on sandy subsoil and geotextile, the impinging wave 
height should not be more than 1.5 m .The danger associated with such application may 
be local profile deformation and liquefaction. 
   So it reveals that there was inappropriate selection of armor unit type during the design of 
marine drive shore protection.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6: Cross section of the protection works 
 
Figure 7:  A typical sub-soil filter 
 
 470 
4. Redesign of Protective Works 
 
Redesign section of this study includes designing the revetment with various types of armor unit. 
The existing design used 600 mm thickness of concrete cube blocks considering 2m wave height. 
The study finds the critical wave height along the marine drive road exceeds 2m and its value is 
up to 3m. Because the use of concrete cube blocks are not recommended for wave heights greater 
than 1.5 m, this study designs the marine drive shore protection using other types armor unit such 
as Tetrapod, Coreloc and Xbloc (Figure 8).  
 
For Tetrapod and Coreloc, the mass, thickness and number of armor unit per area required for a 
stable shore protection project are determined by following equations referred from Shore 
Protection Manual (1984). The most widely used measure of armor unit stability (W), layer 
thickness (r) and number of armor unit (Nr) developed by Hudson (1961) are given as follows: 
cot)1( 3
3


rd
r
SgK
HwW      …………………………………. (1) 
3/1






  gw
WWnkr
r
……………………………………………….(2) 
(a) Tetrapod (b) Coreloc 
(c) Xbloc 
Figure 8: Photo view of Tetrapod, Coreloc and Xbloc used as shore protection armor unit 
 471 
3/2
100
1 













 
g
rr
W
wp
nk
A
N
…………………………………….. (3) 
 
Where, wr = unit weight of concrete, H = design wave height, Kd= Stability Coefficient, Sr = 
specific gravity of armor unit,  θ = slope of the structure, W = required mass of individual armor 
unit, r = layer thickness in meter, n = number of armor units that would fit within the layer 
thickness, kΔ = layer coefficient and p = average porosity of the cover layer.  
   The armor unit, called the Xbloc, is a simple, robust and reliable armor unit. It has considerable 
structural integrity as an individual element and has great hydraulic in the armor layer. Casting 
and positioning the Xbloc is straightforward and very cost effective. The design parameters for 
different wave heights for Xbloc are given in Shore Protection Manual (1984). Considering the 
design wave height as 3 m and the taking the standard values of the other parameters given in 
Shore Protection Manual (1984), the design values for shore protection works along the marine 
drive road at Cox’s Bazar are given in Table 1 below.  
  
Table 1 Specifications of armor units 
 
 
   These armor units should be incorporated with design considerations of filter layer and toe 
protection conforming theoretical basis and also coastal practice.  
 
 
5. Conclusion 
 
The marine drive road in Cox’s Bazar is one of the prominent exploitable potential in Bangladesh 
considering its importance on country’s tourism and communication link between Cox’s Bazar to 
Teknaf. The first phase of this project has been a 24 km road, which linked Kalatoli with Inani. 
To protect this road from the wave impacts of sea, shore protection work was constructed on the 
sea side slope where sea is appreciably close to the driveway. Construction phase ended in the 
year 2008, but the protection work started to fail in the following year 2009 making the road 
exposed to increased wave actions. The study finds four most probable reasons associated with 
the failures, which are discrepancy in design considerations, inappropriate toe protection, 
inadequate sub-soil filter layer and inappropriate selection of armor unit as cover layer of 
revetment. The study also investigates the redesigning of the protection work with different type 
of armor units including Tetrapod, Coreloc and Xbloc. The new design overcomes previous 
lacking and also copes with applied costal practice. 
 
Armor unit Wave height (m) 
Mass of individual 
armor unit 
(ton) 
Thickness 
(m) 
Number of 
units per 
100 m2 
Tetrapod 3.0 m 1.61 1.82 135 
Coreloc 3.0 m 1.05 1.22 94 
Xbloc 3.0 m 1.80 1.30 70 
 472 
References 
 
Bezuijen, A. and Breteler, M.K. (1996). Design Formulas for Block Revetments. Journal of 
Waterway, Port, Coastal, Ocean Eng., ASCE. Vol. 122, Issue 6. 
BRTC, BUET (2003). Final Report on Marine Drive Road -Feasibility Study.   
Hudson, S.Y. (1961). Laboratory Investigations of Rubble Mound Breakwater. Trans. ASCE, Vol 
126, Part IV, p. 491. 
Pilarczyk, K.W. (1998). Dikes and Revetments, A.A. Balkema Publisher, Rotterdam. 
Sharmin, T. (2009). Study on available protection works around coastal zone of Bangladesh. 
B.Sc. Engg. Thesis, Dept. of Water Resources Engineering, BUET. 
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (1984). Shore Protection Manual, U.S. Government Printing 
Office, Washington, D.C. 
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (1995). Design of Coastal Revetments, Seawalls and Bulkheads, 
U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C. 
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (2010). Coastal Engineering Manual, U.S. Army Engineer 
Research and Development Center. 
 
473 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
POTENTIALITY OF ELECTROCOAGULATED METAL HYDROXIDE SLUDGE 
(EMHS) FROM TEXTILE INDUSTRY IN MANUFACTURING OF BUILDING 
MATERIALS 
 
 
Tanveer Mehedi Adyel1, Syed Hafizur Rahman1, S.M. Nazrul Islam1, Hossain Md. Sayem2, Mala 
Khan3, Md. Abdul Gafur4 Mohammad Moniruz Zaman5 and Md. Mahbubur Rahman Bhuiyan6 
 
 
ABSTRACT: Present work was conducted to investigate the reuse feasibility of 
Electrocoagulated Metal Hydroxide Sludge (EMHS) from textile industry in manufacturing of 
building blocks. Geo-engineering, elemental, thermal profile and surface microstructure of 
EMHS were investigated using British Standard 1377, Energy Dispersive X-ray Fluorescence 
(EDXRF), Thermogravimetric/ Differential Thermal Analyzer (TG/DTA) and Scanning Electron 
Microscope (SEM), respectively. Different batches of building blocks were prepared using up to 
50% EMHS in soil and fired at different temperatures. EMHS proportion and firing temperature 
were the two key factors determining the quality of building blocks. Building blocks fired at 
1050°C with up to 20% EMHS in soil were usable for non-loading applications such as 
ornamental bricks, decoratioal purpose and fence of garden. 
 
Key Words: EDXRF, TG/DTA, SEM, Shrinkage, Water adsorption, Compressive strength 
1. Introduction 
The degradation of the environment due to discharge of polluting sludge from textile industries is 
a real problem in several countries and this situation is even worse in developing countries like 
                                                        
1Former Student, Department of Environmental Sciences, Jahangirnagar University, Dhaka-1342, 
Bangladesh. tanveeradyel@gmail.com  
1Associate Professor, Department of Environmental Sciences, Jahangirnagar University, Dhaka-1342, 
Bangladesh. hafizsr@yahoo.com  
1Lecturer, Department of Environmental Sciences, Jahangirnagar University, Dhaka-1342, Bangladesh. 
shawun_env_512@yahoo.com 
2Lecturer, Department of Geological Sciences, Jahangirnagar University, Dhaka-1342, Bangladesh. 
sayem_geo@yahoo.com 
3Project Director, Instrumentation and Calibration Service Laboratory (ICSL), Bangladesh Council of 
Scientific and Industrial Research (BCSIR), Dhaka-1205, Bangladesh. malakhan_07@yahoo.com 
4Senior Engineer, Pilot Plant and Process Development Center (PP & PDC), BCSIR, Dhaka-1205, 
Bangladesh. m_a_gafur@yahoo.com 
5Senior Scientific Officer, Institute of Glass and Ceramic Research and Testing (IGCRT), BCSIR, Dhaka-
1205, Bangladesh. babul62@yahoo.com 
6Delta Group of Industries, Gazipur Bangladesh. mahbub.bhuiyan10@gmail.com Corresponding author:  
474 
 
Bangladesh where little or no treatment is carried out before disposals. Moreover as various steps 
are taken to maintain and improve the quality of surface waters by government bodies, the 
quantities of sludge generated by these industries continue to increase. Thus industries are 
confronted with an urgent need to develop safe and feasible alternative practices for sludge 
management. The overall characteristics of textile sludge depend on the source of the wastewater, 
industrial types, and wastewater treatment facilities. It contain a wide range of component 
including organic and inorganic matter, bacteria and viruses, oil and grease, nutrients such as 
nitrogen and phosphorus, heavy metals and compounds (Thomson et al., 1999). Each component 
of the sludge has its own impact towards environmental and health of the people living within the 
immediate vicinity of the sludge disposal location (Thomson et al., 1999). 
 
Electrocoagulated metal hydroxide sludge (EMHS) generates during treatment of polluted 
effluent by electrocoagulation (EC) technique (Golder et al., 2006). In EC sacrificial anodes 
(aluminum or iron electrodes) corrode to release active coagulant precursors. Coagulant produces 
insoluble metallic hydroxide flocs which can remove pollutants by surface complexation or 
electrostatic attraction (Mollah et al., 2001).  The coagulants are in the form of both monomeric 
hydroxide ions and highly charged polymeric metal hydroxyl species, e.g., Fe(H2O)63+, 
Fe(H2O)5(OH)2+, Fe(H2O)4(OH)2+, Fe2(H2O)8(OH)24+ and Fe2(H2O)6(OH)44+, for anodes made of 
iron (Amirtharajah and Mills, 1982). These species neutralize the electrostatic charges on the 
suspended solids and facilitate agglomeration resulting in separation from the aqueous phase by 
producing EMHS. 
 
In our country all types of sludge are disposed in landfill site haphazardly or openly which leads 
to soil, surface water and groundwater contamination. Therefore, development of new 
technologies to recycle, reuse and convert waste materials into reusable materials is critically 
important for protection of our environment and sustainable development of our society. While 
landfills are commonly used for disposal of sludge, rapid urbanization has made it increasingly 
difficult to find suitable landfill sites in Bangladesh and incineration is costly. At places, it is 
disposed off to nearby rivers or low laying areas, which is likely to pollute surface and 
groundwater. A possible long-term solution appears to be recycling of the EMHS sustainably and 
using it for beneficial purposes. One technique that is available is solidification that stabilizes and 
solidifies components of waste. The solidified product is disposed off to a secure landfill site or it 
can be recycled and reused as construction materials like bricks, concrete or building blocks if it 
meets the specific strength requirement (Rahmat, 2001). Utilization or reuse of EMHS as 
construction and building materials or building blocks is a win-win strategy because it not only 
converts the waste materials into useful materials but also alleviates the disposal problem. The 
prospective benefits of using sludge as building blocks additives include immobilizing toxic and 
heavy metal in the fired matrix, oxidizing organic matter and destroying any pathogen during the 
firing process and reducing the frost damage based on the results of several full or bench scale 
studies (Tay and Show, 1999; Lin and Weng, 2001; Weng et al., 2003). Although there are works 
on sludge of sewage, paper industry, common effluent treatment plant of textile industry, 
electroplating industry, oil and petroleum industry to make constructional materials i.e., brick, 
blocks, roofing materials, concretes, tiles (Alleman et al., 1990; Trauner, 1993; Tay and Show, 
1999; Lin and Weng, 2001; Weng et al., 2003; Liew et al., 2004; Balasubramanian et al., 2006; 
Chen and Lin, 2009; Ha et al., 2008;  Ismail et al., 2010), but there is no work on EMHS to reuse 
475 
 
it into such materials. Present study systematically explores the reuse potentiality of EMHS 
generated from effluent treatment by EC in a composite textile industry as an alternative material 
applied as partial replacement of soil in manufacturing of building blocks. . In order to get quality 
products, the influence of sludge proportion in building blocks and firing temperature were 
studied. Prior such investigation geo engineering, elemental, thermal and morphological 
properties of EMHS were also analyzed.  
 
2. Materials and Methods 
 
2.1. Samples collection and preparation  
 
The wet EMHS samples were collected from Adury Knit Composite Ltd., (Geographic Location: 
24002´ N latitude and 90044´ E longitude), Narshingdi, Bangladesh. The samples were stored into 
separate plastic container and kept at ambient temperature prior to analysis. Soil sample was 
collected from local brick field. For geo-engineering properties investigation, EMHS was mixed 
with soil from 10% to 40% on wet weight basis. Pure sample that contained 100% soil and 100% 
EMHS, was also used for comparison. After sun dried of EMHS and EMHS amended soil, 
samples were made powder using a grinder. Samples that passed through a 20 mesh sieve were 
taken for elemental, thermal and microstructure analysis.  
 
2.2. Analysis of different properties 
 
British Standard 1377 (1990) was applied for determination of geo-engineering properties. For 
this regard moisture content, specific gravity, liquid limit, plastic limit and linear shrinkage were 
determined by oven-drying method, small pyknometer method, fall cone penetrometer, rolling 
thread method, respectively. ARL QUANT’X EDXRF (Thermo Scientific, USA) that was 
equipped with a Rhodium (Rh) anode along with an assembly of eight filters (Al, Cellulose, Cu 
thick, Cu thin, No, Pd medium, Pd thick and Pd thin) and a Si (Li) detector (with a 15 mm2 area 
and ≤76 micron Beryllium window) was used for the elemental analysis of EMHS, soil and 
EMHS amended soil. Thermogravimetric or thermal profile of the samples was analyzed by a 
Thermogravimetric/ Differential Thermal Analyzer, TG/DTA 6300, (Seiko Instruments Inc, 
Japan) by heating from 30ºC to 1150ºC in pure nitrogen gas medium under the heating rate of 
20ºC/min. Surface morphology and microstructure of EMHS were analyzed by Scanning 
Electron Microscope (HITACHI S-3400N, Japan).  
 
2.3. Preparation and quality assessment of building blocks 
 
Both the soil and EMHS sample were sun-dried and made powder using a grinder and sieve 
though 100 mesh. In molding process, these EMHS was added to soil by 10% to 50% in weight 
basis. EMHS free mixture was also made as reference. Dry mixing was done first and then 10% 
aqueous solution of sodium silicate (Na2SiO3) was added to make homogeneous paste and to bind 
the materials in the mixture well. Mixtures were then introduced into a series of building block 
molds with size of 2"×2"×2". Prod with a wooden rod 32 times in about 16 seconds was 
conducted to ensure elimination of entrained air. After 24 hours maturation followed by drying at 
room temperature, different batch of the molded blocks were fired in an electric furnace 
476 
 
(Nabertherm, Germany) at the temperature 950ºC, 1000ºC and 1050ºC for 6 hours  maintaining a 
soaking period of 15 min to get the finished products. Quality of building blocks was assessed in 
terms of weight loss on ignition, shrinkage on ignition, water adsorption and compressive 
strength as formula given in Table 1.  
 
Table 1 Name, specific methods and using formula for assessing quality of building blocks 
 
Parameter Using Formula 
Weight Loss 
on Ignition 
 
Where, Wa =Weight of building block specimen before firing (gm), Wb= 
Weight of building block specimen after firing (gm) 
Shrinkage on 
Ignition 
 
Where, Va= Volume of building block specimen before firing (cm3), 
Vb=Volume of building block specimen after firing (cm3) 
Water 
Adsorption 
 
Where, Wa= Weight of building block specimen before water submersion 
(gm), Ws= Weight of building block specimen after water submersion (gm) 
Compressive 
Strength 
Using a hydraulic press (Fred S. Carver Inc, U.S.A). 
 
 
3. Results and Discussion  
 
3.1. Different properties of EMHS  
 
Basic geo-engineering properties of EMHS and EMHS amended soil is given in Table 3. As 
more EMHS was added in the soil, these properties showed a general increasing trend. Specific 
gravity of soil and clay in their natural state depends on their mineral composition, particle size, 
distribution of components, texture, resulting void ratio and moisture contents. In addition of 
EMHS, specific gravity of the mixture was increased due to presence of very high iron content in 
EMHS.   
Average Fe content in EMHS was 923.81 g/kg and this exceeds the allowable range to dispose in 
agricultural land. Exposure of iron from the sludge into soils may contaminate it and change the 
soil structure and thus make it harmful for cultivation (Islam et al., 2009).Present study found 
very high Fe content in EMHS because in EC treatment system iron electrodes were used and 
these electrodes dissociated and removed pollutants from wastewater and hence produced sludge 
that contained all iron content of electrodes as well as from various chemicals used in the 
industry.Hematite, rust, magnetite, lepidocrocite, feroxyhite, maghemite and goethite have been 
identified as EC by-products by Parga et al., (2005) and Gomes et al., (2007). High range of Mn 
content in EMHS makes it unusable in agricultural land (Islam et al., 2009). 
 
Ti, Cu, Ni, and Zn are heavy metal and toxic to environmental health and their average 
concentration in EMHS was 0.56, 0.53, 0.184 and 0.32 g/kg, respectively. Cr, V, Hg and Sr are 
also heavy metal and mean concentration varied as 130, 14.5, 166.5 and 66.5 mg/kg, respectively. 
Cu, Ni, Zn and Cr exceeded the recommended value in case of industrial waste (Awahthi, 2000; 
477 
 
Table 2 Basic geo-engineering properties of EMHS and EMHS amended soil 
 
Properties Addition 
of EMHS 
in Soil 
Moisture 
Content 
(%) 
Specific 
Gravity 
Liquid 
Limit 
(%) 
Plastic 
Limit 
(%) 
Plasticity 
Index 
Liquidity 
Index 
Linear 
Shrinkage 
(%) 
0% 
10% 
20% 
30% 
40% 
100% 
43.4 
55.2 
70.3 
73.9 
77.6 
92.85 
2.7 
2.75 
2.77 
2.8 
2.82 
2.92 
45 
55.5 
66.6 
78 
95 
339 
21.3 
29.9 
33. 
34.3 
42.1 
62 
24.4 
25.85 
35.4 
44 
53.4 
278 
0.89 
0.86 
1.04 
0.9 
0.66 
0.13 
9.92 
11.4 
12.85 
14.28 
18.31 
30.49 
 
CCME, 2003) as well as to apply in agricultural land. Some other heavy metals that were found 
in EMHS included Nb, Cd, and Ga and their content in EMHS ranged from 20 to 35 mg/kg, 11 
to18 mg/kg and 0 to 24 mg/kg, respectively. Cd content in EMHS was higher than the 
recommended value to apply in the agricultural land (Awahthi, 2000). Cl, Br and S content in 
EMHS ranged from 1.03 to 3.2 g/kg, 0 to 18 mg/kg and 10.6 to 14.9 g/kg, respectively. So in 
overall, pre-treatment process for reducing the amount of heavy metal is essential before the 
EMHS can be used as a soil conditioner in the agricultural land. Soil sample contained 603.6 
mg/kg Si while Fe was 104.05 g/kg. 
 
Figure 1 illustrated the TG, DTA and DTG curves of EMHS and soil, respectively. The nature of 
TG trace showed the 0.5% initial loss of weight from room temperature to 45ºC due to removal 
of moisture content (Wang and Xue, 2010). The onset of temperature 23.3% weight loss occurred 
from 45ºC to 650ºC due to dehydration and volatilization (removal of volatiles) of the sample. 
From 650ºC to 901ºC, about 5.5% weight loss occurred (Wang and Xue, 2010). Up to 
programmed temperature, 29.3% weight of sample was degraded and 70.7% weight remained. 
DTA thermogram showed two endothermic peaks at 90ºC and 382ºC due to moisture and thermal 
degradation of sample, respectively. DTG curve showed three distinct peaks at 87ºC, 308ºC and 
811ºC. The initial peak was due to mass loss of absorbed moisture at the rate of 0.112 mg/min. 
The second peak appeared which is attributed to thermal degradation of volatiles materials 
presented in the sample at the rate of 0.066 mg/min. The third peak arrived due to some oxidation 
of sample at 0.051 mg/min. It was indicated that EMHS was thermally stable and in dry weight 
basis 29.3% weight loss occurred at temperature up to 1100°C and this may particularly due to 
presence of high Fe content. TG curve of soil showed only 2.9% weight loss up to programmed 
temperature and 97.1% weight remained. DTA thermogram showed two endothermic peaks at 
86ºC and 457ºC due to moisture and thermal degradation of sample, respectively. In DTG curve, 
only one distinct peak was found at 78ºC due to loss of adsorbed water of soil surface at a rate 
0.026 mg/min. 
 
Figure 2 showed the SEM micrograph of EMHS at an accelerating and deceleration voltage 
15000 volt and 0 volt, respectively with a working distance10000 µm and  emission current 
61000 to 66000 nA. EMHS sample was amorphous in nature with edge and porous in body 
surface. Micrometer sized particles that were generated during treatment of dye were mostly 
478 
 
Temp Cel
1000800600400200
D
TA
 u
V
20.00
15.00
10.00
5.00
0.00
-5.00
-10.00
-15.00
-20.00
100.0
80.0
60.0
40.0
20.0
0.0
-20.0
-40.0
D
TG
 m
g/
m
in
1.000
0.800
0.600
0.400
0.200
0.000
23.3%
5.5%
45Cel
99.5%
605Cel
76.2% 901Cel
70.7%
90Cel
0.41uV
87Cel
0.112mg/min
811Cel
0.051mg/min
308Cel
0.066mg/min
382Cel
4.48uV
 
 
Figure 1 TG/DTA profile of EMHS  Figure 2 SEM micrograph of EMHS 
 
amorphous in nature (Mollah et al., 2010). Maximum particle were irregular in shape with sharp 
and hard surface. Some pore on surface was observed, filling with a number of small grains and 
forming a complex structure. Due to this surface structure they may resistance to weathering. 
 
3.2. Quality of building blocks 
 
A good building block should hard. Initially building blocks considered unsuitable if building 
blocks developed cracks while dying; if building blocks developed cracks after firing at any of 
the temperatures tested; or if deformation in the shape or size of bricks was observed (Roy et al., 
2007). All the building blocks of present work were in good shape and size and no deformation 
was occurred at any firing temperature. After firing at different temperature weight loss on 
ignition, shrinkage on ignition, water adsorption and compressive strength was the main criteria 
for assessment the overall quality of building blocks.  
 
 
3.2.1. Weight loss on ignition  
Figure 3(a) showed the effect of EMHS addition on the weight loss on ignition of normal 
building blocks after firing at different temperature. As more EMHS was mixed with soil and 
fired at higher temperature, more weight loss occurred. Weight loss generally occurred due to 
evaporation of water from products, melting of inorganic substances and combustion of organic 
matter during the firing process (Lin and Weng, 2001; Weng et al., 2003; Roy et al., 2007). A 
first class brick has a maximum weight loss on ignition of 15%. So from present study it was 
indicated that normal building blocks contained up to 30%, 20% and 10% EMHS and fired at 
950°C, 1000°C and1050°C, respectively fulfill the standard criteria. Esthetically, the surface 
texture of the building block was moderately even with the appearance of low small pores, 
thereby it can be used as facing bricks a well as ornamental bricks (Mahzuz et al., 2009).  
 
479 
 
3.2.2. Shrinkage on ignition  
The quality of building blocks can be also assured according to the degree of firing shrinkage. 
Normally a good quality brick exhibits shrinkage below 8%. Because the swelling of the clay is 
much lower than that of sludge, an addition of sludge to the mixture widens the degree of firing 
shrinkage as result the quality of products is downgraded (Weng et al., 2003). Normal building 
blocks produced from soil had shrinkage of 8.1%, 8.5% and 12.9% at firing temperature of 
950°C, 1000°C and 1050°C, respectively. As firing temperature and portion of EMHS in soil 
increased, the shrinkage also increased as shown in Figure 3(b). The brick shrinkage on ignition 
is not only attributed to the organic matter content in the clay, but it also depends on the inorganic 
substance in both clay and sludge being burnt off during the firing process (Lin and Weng, 2001; 
Weng et al., 2003). 
 
 
 
 
(a)  (b) 
 
 
 
(c)  (d) 
 
Figure 3 Quality of building blocks- (a) weight loss on ignition, (b) shrinkage on ignition, (c) 
water adsorption, (d) compressive strength at different EMHS percentage and firing temperature 
 
480 
 
3.2.3. Water adsorption  
Water adsorption is a key factor affecting the durability of various types of building blocks and 
bricks. The degrees of firmness and compaction of building blocks, as measured by their water 
adsorption characteristics, vary considerably depending on factors such as the type of clay and 
methods of production used. Low water infiltration into the brick indicates good durability of the 
brick and resistance to the natural surroundings. Figure 3(c) showed the results of the water 
adsorption tests of building blocks. The value of water adsorption is proportional to the quantity 
of EMHS added. Increasing the firing temperature resulted in a decrease of water absorption, 
thereby increasing the weathering resistance. According to the criterion of water adsorption of 
bricks in ASTM (1998), the ratio is below 17% for first- class brick and 17 to 22% for second-
class brick. According to this guideline building block with 10% EMHS burnt at 1000°C to 
1050°C were in first class category. Normal building block with 10% EMHS fired at 950°C, with 
20% EMHS fired at 1000°C and with 20% and 30% EMHS fired at 1050°C fall within second-
class category. The building blocks exhibited general compliance with some criteria for load 
bearing bricks under class 1 and 2 because there are no specific requirements in these classes 
(Liew et al., 2004). 
 
3.2.4. Compressive strength 
The strength of a material, in general terms, is its ability to resist forces at failure. The strength of 
dry building blocks was obviously higher than that of wet state. The results of the compressive 
strength test of the building blocks made from both soil and EMHS mixtures and fired at different 
temperature was shown in Figure 3(d). The results indicated that the strength was greatly 
dependent on the amount of EMHS in the building blocks and the firing temperature. 
Compressive strength of building blocks decreased with increase of EMHS in the mixture but 
increased with the increase of firing temperature.   
 
As EMHS is not suitable for agricultural land application, it can be utilized in other beneficial 
purposes. One technique is solidification that stabilizes and solidifies components of waste 
sludge. The solidified product is disposed off to a secure landfill site or it can be recycled and 
reused as construction materials like bricks, concrete or building blocks if it meets the specific 
qualities. Although the blocks did not comply with 1st or 2nd class standard, normal building 
blocks with 20% EMHS can be prescribed for the uses of non- loading purposes such as 
ornamental bricks, decoratioal purpose and fence of garden etc.. 
 
 
4. Conclusion 
 
As the amount of sludge produced by wastewater or effluent treatment plant increases, effective 
reuse and safe disposal of sludge becomes an important issue because accumulation of sludge is 
not only a burden to the industry but also affects the environment adversely. Potential reuse 
feasibility of EMHS in manufacturing of building blocks as a partial replacement of soil were 
investigated in present study. To assess the quality of blocks weight loss on ignition, firing 
shrinkage, water adsorption and compressive strength of the manufactured blocks were 
investigated. EMHS proportion and firing temperature were the two key factors determining the 
quality of building blocks. At 1050°C firing temperature, up to 20% and 30% EMHS can applied 
481 
 
in soil for normal building blocks, respectively to manufacture good quality blocks and these 
blocks can be easily used of non- loading purposes such as ornamental bricks, decoratioal 
purpose and fence of garden. 
 
 
References  
 
Alleman, J.E., Bryan, E.H. and Stumm, T.A. (1990). Sludge-amended brick production: 
applicability  
   for metal-laden residues. Water Science and Technology, 22(12):309–317. 
Amirtharajah, A. and Mills, K.M. (1982). Rapid-mix design for mechanisms of alum coagulation.  
Journal American Water Works Association, 74(4):210-216. 
ASTM (American Society of Testing Materials) (1998). ASTM C67 standard test method for 
sampling and test brick and structural clay tile. Annual book of ASTM standards, Sec.4, 
Construction, 04.08, 04.09, Soil and rock (I) and (II), West Conshohocken, Pa. 
Awashthi, S.K. (2000). Prevention of Food Adulteration Act no 37 of 1954. Central and State 
Rules as Amended for 1999. 3rd Edition, Ashoka Law House, New Delhi, India. 
Balasubramania, J., Sabumon, P.C., Lazar, J.U. and Ilangovan, R. (2006). Reuse of textile 
effluent treatment plant sludge in building materials. Waste Management, 26(1):22-28. 
British Standard 1377. (1990). Methods for test for civil engineering purposes. British Standard 
Institute, London. 
CCME (Canadian Council of Ministers of the Environment) (2003). Canadian Soil Quality 
Guidelines for the Protection of the Environment and Human Health: Summary Table. 
Chen, L. and Lin, D.F. (2009). Applications of sewage sludge ash and nano-SiO2 to manufacture 
tile as construction material. Construction and Building Materials, 23(11):3312-3320.  
Golder, A.K., Samanta, A.N. and Ray, S. (2006). Anionic reactive dye removal from aqueous 
solution using a new adsorbent-sludge generated in removal of heavy metal by 
electrocoagulation. Chemical Engineering Journal, 122: 107–115. 
Gomes, J.A.G., Cocke, D.L., Daida, P., Kesmez, M., Weir, M., Moreno, H., Parga, J.R.,  Irwin, 
G., McWhinney, H., Grady, T. and Peterson, E. (2007). Arsenic removal by 
electrocoagulation using combined Al–Fe electrode system and characterization of products. 
Journal of Hazardous Materials, B139:220–231. 
Ha, N.T., Yem, T. and Mai, V.T. (2008). Study on reuse of heavy metal rich sludge in ceramic 
pigment and construction material production. VNU Journal of Science, Natural Sciences and 
Technology, 24:280-286. 
Islam, M.M., Halim, M.A., Safiullah, S., Hoque, S.A.M.W. and Islam, M.S. (2009). Heavy metal 
(Pb, Cd, Zn, Cu, Cr and Mn) content in textile sludge in Gazipur, Bangladesh. Research 
Journal of Environmental Science, 3: 311-315. 
Ismail, M., Ismail, M.A., Lau, S.K., Muhammad, B. and Majid, Z. (2010). Fabrication of  bricks 
from paper sludge and palm oil fuel ash. Concreate Research Letter, 1(2):13-18. 
Liew, A.G., Idris, A., Samad, A.A., Wong, C.H.K., Jaafar, M.S. and Baki, A.M. (2004). 
Reusability of sewage sludge in clay bricks. Journal of Material Cycles and Waste 
Management, 6:41–47. 
Lin, D.F. and Weng, C.H. (2001). Use of sewage sludge ash as brick material. Journal of 
Environmental Engineering, 127(10):922-727. 
482 
 
Mahzuz, H.M.A., Alam, R., Alam, M.N., Basak, R. and Islam, M.S. (2009). Use of arsenic 
contaminated sludge in making ornamental bricks. International Journal of Environmental 
Science and Technology, 6(2):291-298. 
Mollah, M.Y.A., Schennach, R., Parga, J.R. and Cocke, D.L. (2001). Electrocoagulation (EC) – 
science and applications. Journal of Hazardous Materials, B84:29–41.   
Mollah, M.Y.A., Gomes, J.A.G., Das, K.K. and Cocke, D.L. (2010). Electrochemical treatment 
of Orange II dye solution-use of aluminum sacrificial electrodes and floc characterization. 
Journal of Hazardous Materials, 174:851–858. 
Parga, J.R., Cocke, D.L., Valverde, V., Gomes, J.A.G., Kesmez, M.,  Moreno, H.,  Weir, M. and 
Mencer, D. (2005). Characterization of electrocoagulation for removal of Cr and As. Journal 
of Chemical Engineering Technology, 28:605– 612. 
Rahmat, M.N. (2001). Development of environmentally friendly building material: An analysis 
of the use of solidified industrial waste. Available from:  
 http://www.unu.edu/env/arsenic/Dhaka2003/15-Rouf.pdf 
Roy, S., Adhikari, G.R. and Gupta, R.N. (2007). Use of gold mill tailings in making brick: a    
feasibility study. Waste Management & Research, 25(5): 475-482.  
Tay, J.H. and Show, K.Y. (1999). Constructive sludge disposal option converting sludge into 
innovative civil engineering materials. Proceeding of 7th International Association on Water 
Quality (IAWQ). Asia-Pacific Regional Conference, Taipei, Taiwan, 1023–1028. 
Thomson, J.C., Azariah, J. and Viji, A.G.R. (1999). Impact of textile industries on river Noyyal 
and riverine ground water quality in Tirupur, India. Journal of Pollution Research, 18(4):359–
368.  
Trauner, E.J. (1993). Sludge ash bricks fired to above and below ash vitrifying temperature. 
Journal of Environmental Engineering, 119(3):506–519. 
Weng, C.H., Lin, D.F. and Chiang, P.C. (2003). Utilization of sludge as brick materials. 
Advances in Environmental Research, 7(3):679-685.  
483 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF WASTEWATER QUALITY: A CASE STUDY OF RAJSHAHI CITY 
CORPORATION, BANGLADESH 
 
 
Md. Mosiur Rahman1 and Dr. Md. Shafi Uddin Miah2 
 
 
ABSTRACT: The available surface water resources are scarce, as a result of water deterioration 
and growing demand due to the increase in the world’s population. The irrigation water quality 
was assessed around Rajshahi City Corporation in Bangladesh, where surface and underground 
water is highly contaminated. The quality of groundwater may be related to the quality of 
wastewater discharged into the environment. Wastewater management systems can represent 
locally significant point sources of groundwater contamination. National and International water 
quality standards were used as water quality criterion to assess water quality. Water samples were 
collected four place of Rajshahi City Corporation for determining water quality parameters, 
which included PH, EC, TDS, Ca, Mg, Na, K, TSS, N, P, DO, BOD & COD for chemical analysis. 
Environmental sustainability was conduct with the local stockholders by participatory rural 
appraisal (PRA) tools. The characteristics of the wastewater discharges vary depending upon the 
population density and industrialization, land use pattern, groundwater levels, and degree of 
separation between storm water and sanitary wastes. Wastewater is a critical component of 
intensive water recycling in agriculture purpose. Absolute purification of wastewater is not 
always possible. The study emphasizes the integration of this alternative water supply into water 
resources planning and the emergence of modern wastewater reclamation and reuse practice. 
 
Keywords: Waster water quality, Sustainability, Water quality standards, Participatory Rural 
Appraisal (PRA) tools, Integration, Reclamation and Reuse. 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
1.1. Recycling of wastewater for irrigation 
 
Wastewater is a critical component of intensive water recycling in agriculture purpose; however, 
recycling does tend to concentrate salts in the flows leaving the study area. Where measured coli-
form levels high, shows significant evidence of direct health impacts of wastewater irrigation. 
The public health risks associated with wastewater reuse include increased exposure to infectious 
diseases, trace organic compounds and heavy metals. Wastewater contains the full spectrum of 
enteric pathogens endemic within a community. The establishment of the World Health 
Organization (WHO) guidelines on wastewater use in 1989 effectively ended the international 
                                                        
1Research Student, Civil Engineering Department, RUET, Rajshahi, Bangladesh. mosiur26ce@yahoo.com 
2Professor, Department of Civil Engineering, RUET, Rajshahi, Bangladesh. shafi_ruet@yahoo.com 
484 
 
debate (with some strident objections) on how stringent bacteriological standards need to be 
safeguard public health. As a result, the risks of intestinal nematodes (bacteria at high levels) in 
untreated wastewater are recognized as important concern. The discharge of wastewater to the 
environment without any treatment plays significant risk for public health and also poses 
environmental pollution. 
 
1.2. The Government initiatives to address environmental protection and development 
 
Bangladesh has limitations in resources and capacities in terms of technology or money to 
confront with massive environmental disasters. Therefore, the government of Bangladesh has 
been working relentlessly to develop and conserve environment to prevent major environmental 
disasters. Hydrological research project is aimed to improve the institutional and organizational 
arrangements, technical capabilities and physical facilities available for measurement, collection, 
analysis, validation transfer and dissemination of hydrological, hydro-meteorological and water 
quality data for basic water resource evaluation. 
 
2. The Major Environmental Problem of Bangladesh 
 
Due to geographical location, Bangladesh suffers from a range of environmental problems, which 
are from drought, flood and other natural hazards. Frequencies of hazards are on the increasing 
day by day. The quality of soil has deteriorated due to reckless use of agrochemicals, unplanned 
land use, undesirable encroachment on forest areas for agriculture and settlements and 
indiscriminate disposal of hazardous industrial wastes. Now in Bangladesh, presence of high-
level arsenic contamination in ground water is a national problem. An emerging 226 issues of 
great concern in the cities and towns is the high concentration of lead in the air from vehicular 
exhausts. The depletion of biodiversity is the result of various kinds of human interventions that 
impinge on it through destruction and degradation of land, forest and aquatic habitats. These 
activities encompass the sectors of agriculture, forestry, fisheries, urbanization, industry, transport, 
tourism, energy, chemicals and minerals etc.  
 
2.1. Background of Rajshahi city corporation 
 
Rajshahi division is one of ten administrative divisions of Bangladesh and is divided into 16 zilas 
(districts), 128 upazillas (sub-divisions of zilas) and 1,092 Unions. Rajshahi Zila has 9 upazilas, 
70 unions, 1,858 villages and seven pourashava (municipalities), including RCC. The population 
of Rajshahi Division was 24% of the population of Bangladesh, making it the second most 
populous division. Rajshahi Zila has a population of 2,286,874. Land use statistics in the 1994 
Drainage Plan suggest that agriculture and horticulture is the largest land use category in the RCC 
area, accounting for 31.0% of the land but a study for the Rajshahi Structure Plan and Master 
Plan recorded a much smaller area of 18.7% of agricultural land within the RCC area but also 
recorded a further 48% in the extended urban area.  
 
 
  
 
 
485 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (Source: RCC, 2006 and Bangladesh district map, 2008) 
Figure 1 Wastewater sampling area of Rajshahi City Corporation within Rajshahi district, 
Bangladesh. 
2.1.1 Physical Characteristics  
Rajshahi is in the western dry zone and has a mean annual rainfall of below 1524 mm. Rajshahi 
Zila covers five of the 30 agro-ecological zones, soil textures are Loamy and Clayey and soil PH 
varies from PH 4.5 to PH 7.9; organic matter content of the soils are low or medium. The 
minimum temperature varies from 10oC to 27oC and the maximum temperature from 24oC to 
36oC. There are several water bodies in the RCC area covering 5% of the total land area, used for 
bathing; disposal of wastewater; and irrigation. Groundwater is an important source of domestic 
and irrigation water. 
 
2.1.2 Socio-economic conditions 
In the Rajshani Zila 39% of households depends on cultivation, livestock and 34% on agricultural 
labor as their main source of income. The income from agricultural activities resulted in 61% of 
the households of the RCC area and 70% of the households in the extended area. The literacy 
rates in Rajshahi Zila are 48% for both sexes; similar to the rest of Bangladesh. Rates are much 
higher in the RCC area averaging 67% for both sexes. 
 
2.1.3 Water Supply, Sanitation and Drainage 
In Rajshani district the vast majority of households relying on tube wells for drinking water, 
although in urban areas some 8% of households have piped water supplies compared to less than 
1% in rural areas. Groundwater pollution has been found to be a critical problem in Rajshahi City 
and the surrounding areas, especially high iron and manganese content, which exceed the national 
drinking water standards. Surface water quality is similarly poor because untreated urban effluent 
is discharged through various drains into the khals (canals) and beels (seasonal ponds), and 
ultimately to the agricultural fields to the north, affecting agriculture and posing a risk to human 
health. Access to sanitation facilities in urban areas is much higher than rural areas but access in 
Rajshahi division was lower than in any other division in Bangladesh. In the city area the RCC 
reported that in 2004, 50% of households had sanitary facilities; but 10% do not have any 
sanitation facilities and defecate in the open. Septic tanks and increasingly being linked directly 
to households. As Rajshahi district does not possess any sewerage system, surface run-off drains 
essentially act as sewers, taking the overflow from. 
486 
 
2.1.4 Health and Health Care 
Health care facilities are reasonably good in the RCC area with one general hospital, the Rajshahi 
Medical College Hospital and three specialized hospitals, a TB hospital and an infectious 
diseases hospital. The RCC has also established seven Primary Health Care Centers, to provide 
health services to women and children. In addition there are an increasing number of private 
clinics.  
 
3. Objectives of the study 
 
The specific objectives of the study are 
 
 Know more about the water quality in the Rajshahi City Corporation. 
 Determining for the suitability of the water use in agriculture, particularly in relation to the  
levels of nutrients and substances that may damage crops.  
 
4. Methodology 
 
4.1.1 Procedure for water sample collection 
The single vertical at centroid of flow (VCF) method was used for sampling. Discrete samples 
were collected from each location in the VCF for chemical and microbiological analysis because 
of well mixed conditions and shallow flows. Composite samples were collected for 
parasitological analysis. Water samples were collected in one liter plastic bottle. The ground 
water samples were collected at running condition of the tube wells and surface water samples 
were drawn from midstream at 0-15 cm below the surface of pond water. The collected water 
samples were tightly sealed as early as possible to avoid exposure to air.  
 
4.1.2 Methods used for chemical analysis 
The pH and electrical conductivity (EC) values were determined electrometrically using digital 
pH and digital conductivity meter (Ghosh et al., 1983). Total dissolved solids (TDSs) were 
estimated by weighing the solid residue obtained by evaporation of a measured volume of water 
samples to dryness (Chopra and Kanwar, 1980). Potassium and sodium were determined by 
flame emission spectrophotometer (Golterman, 1971). Calcium, magnesium, iron, zinc, copper 
and manganese were analyzed directly by atomic absorption spectrophotometer (APHA, 1989). 
Bicarbonate was determined by acidimetric titration (Chopra and Kanwar, 1980) while chloride 
was determined by argent metric titration (APHA, 1989). Phosphorus, boron and nitrate were 
determined calorimetrically whereas sulphate was analyzed turbid metrically. Biological oxygen 
demand of the wastewater samples were determined by the procedure of Standard Methods for 
the examination of water and wastewater.  
 
4.1.3 Carrying out socio-economic investigations 
It is an important part of this study to go for social assessment by the local people about the 
management works and protection measures. Local knowledge and adaptations by local people to 
mitigate environmental risks should be given due to attention and might be a good tool for 
understanding. To carry out this operation, PRA methodology would be applied and, where target 
would be focused on consequent social responses. In addition, Key Informant Interview (KII) 
487 
 
procedures would be followed for cross-checking and improvements of PRA information. Key 
Informants will be the local knowledgeable people like retired engineer, physician, contractor, 
teacher, uninon parishad chairman and members, etc. 
 
5. Results and Discussion 
 
5.1 Results 
 
Ground water pollution has been found to be a critical problem in Rajshahi City Corporation and 
the surrounding areas. Most of the parameters tested in the baseline water quality survey were 
within the proposed Bangladesh standards for irrigation and agriculture, and the WHO guidelines 
for wastewater. 
 
Table 1 Test results of four collected samples from Rajshahi City Corporation 
 
 
Test 
Parameters 
RUET 
Garbage Trap 
sample 
results 
RMC 
Drain 
sample 
results 
BSIC Drain 
Sopura 
sample 
results 
Basuar 
Beel 
sample 
results 
Bangladesh 
Standard 
WASPA 
Standard 
PH 5.45 4.50 4.0 6.0 6.5 - 8.0 6.0 
Temperature 
(0C) 22 25 25 25 - 27 
TDS (mg/l) 1200 980 1120 430 600 - 900 1000 
Electric 
Conductivity 
(µmhos/cm) 
1315 1620 1575 1250 1200 1246 
TSS (mg/l) 180 200 160 120 500 80 
Total 
Nitrogen 
(mg/l ) 
37 17.50 31 22 < 5 28 
Total 
Phosporus 
(mg/l ) 
9.72 5.20 8.50 7.50 < 0.50 8.90 
Sodium 
(mg/l ) 106 224 225 82 200 88.90 
Calcium 
(mg/l ) 88.85 92 85 69 75 67.71 
Magnesium 
(mg/l ) 27.56 25 27 23 30 - 35 18.90 
E coli 16000 2500 1400 12000 - 30000 
COD (mg/l 
Oxygen) 250 200 150 95 400 83 
488 
 
Test 
Parameters 
RUET 
Garbage Trap 
sample 
results 
RMC 
Drain 
sample 
results 
BSIC Drain 
Sopura 
sample 
results 
Basuar 
Beel 
sample 
results 
Bangladesh 
Standard 
WASPA 
Standard 
BOD (mg/l 
Oxygen) - 90 55 25 - 22 
DO (mg/l 
Oxygen) 0.0 10 9.50 4.0 4.50 - 8 .0 2.0 
Potassium 
(mg/l ) 26.80 23 26 18 12 21.40 
 
 
Figure 2 Wastewater test results showing variation of PH and temperature at the selected locations.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3 Wastewater test results showing variation of TDS, EC at the selected locations. 
[A = RUET Garbage Trap, B = RMC Drain, C = BSIC Drain, D = Basuar Beel, E = Basuar Beel] 
 
489 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4 Wastewater test results showing variation of TDS, EC, TSS, N, Total P, E-coli, Na, Ca, 
Mg, COD, BOD and DO at the selected locations. 
[A = RUET Garbage Trap, B = RMC Drain, C = BSIC Drain, D = Basuar Beel, E = Basuar Beel] 
 
5.1.1 Environmental Economic Activity situation 
Environmental Economic Activity situation: The point of source of pollution survey identified 
some potential sources of nutrients but this was mainly of domestic origin hotels, residencies, 
hospitals, schools and colleges. The reuse and protection measure creates employment 
opportunities in agricultural sector. Reuse and protection measure has provided some new 
opportunities in that area, such as transportation and tree plantation. They can use the land for 
gardening and produce cash crops.  
490 
 
5.2 Discussion 
 
The industrial and commercial units along main roads within the city and also by-roads in the city 
centre dispose of their wastewater to the main drainage canals. There are no large scale industries 
in the study area that drain into Basuar Beel, most of the wastewater appears to be domestic. The 
hospitals, vehicle service stations, and slaughter houses and meat stalls, hotels and restaurants, 
schools, technical colleges and tuition classes were identified as significant sources of pollution 
in the area. Rajshahi Medical College is felt to be a major source of pollution, as the hospital 
treatment plant is currently not functioning. The hospital discharges a wastewater volume of 758 
m3/day. In addition twelve major private clinics and medical labs were recorded in the catchment 
area, which generate hospital waste. There are two large hotels, five medium-scale hotels and 
approximately 150 small hotels, restaurants and cafes, all of which can be assumed to be 
producing wastewater that contains oil, grease and detergent, as well as small pieces of food, 
which contribute to the organic load of the receiving waters. A large number of units are 
concentrated in the city center and there is a high degree of pollution there which is responsible 
for the condition of Basuar Beel. The drains along Medical College Road, Dargapara Road, 
Circuit House Road, BSIC Road are not well maintained and are silted, blocked and overflowing 
in several places with a large number of inlets from various commercial units. The drain along 
Dargapara Road has a large number of meat stalls concentrated in one area, which is likely to 
have an impact on the water quality in terms of BOD and E-coli.  
 
6. Conclusion 
 
The most concerning factor was that biological quality parameters were not satisfied. It can be 
concluded that the major problem in using wastewater in agriculture in the stdy area is the high 
level of fecal contamination. The wastewater is mainly used for growing paddy and the health 
risks are pre-dominantly to agricultural workers and their families. There could also be health 
risks to the community that use contaminated ground water for washing, cooking and other 
purposes. The community near Rajshahi Medical College could be a significant source of 
pollution and are likely to be a source of fecal c7jy32ontamination, but further monitoring is 
required. Another potential source is BSIC area that is located close-by Basuar beel, although it is 
not a large operation. Nutrients are clearly present in the wastewater and in the case of 
phosphorus are generally high. The presence of nutrients can be beneficial for agricultural end 
use. This is very difficult and these may vary considerably over the year and because crop 
requirements also change throughout the growth cycle, which means that it could be quite a 
complex process to calculate how much N, P or K are available at certain relevant times.  
 
7. Recommendations 
 
In order to bring down the deterioration of the water quality that are used for agriculture at source, 
it is required, 
 
 To work with the industries to improve the quality of their discharges by introducing cleaner 
production techniques, best management practices including structural BMPs and 
institutional options, and wastewater treatment. 
 To prevent waste from being dumped into the canals by ensuring regular collections and by 
increasing composting and recycling in collaboration with the existing solid waste 
491 
 
management programs in the area. 
 To regularly remove solid waste from the canals. 
 To understand the problems of nutrient management when nutrient concentrations in 
wastewater used for irrigation are highly variable. 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
This research was carried under the kind guidance of my honorable teacher Dr. Md. Shafi Uddin 
Miah, Professor, Department of Civil Engineering, Rajshahi University of Engineering & 
Technology. The authors express their deepest gratitude for his continuous guidance throughout 
the undergraduate thesis work. The authors also express their gratitude to the WASPA Asia for 
using permission of their research data, reports and others helping documents. 
 
References 
 
Government of Bangladesh (GoB). 1997. The Environment Conservation Rules. 1997. 
Bangladesh: The Peoples Republic of Bangladesh. 
National Water Supply and Drainage Board (NWSDB). 2005. Initial Environmental Examination 
Report: In Respect of Greater Kurunegala Sewerage Project. Kurunegala, Sri Lanka: Ministry 
of Urban Development and Water Supply. 
Rezwanul Mahmud, Naoto Inoue and Ranjit Sen, 28 May 2007, Assessment of Irrigation Water 
Quality by Using Principal Component Analysis in Arsenic Affected Area of Bangladesh. 
Mahmud, R., Inoue, N. and Sen, R. 2007. Assessment of Irrigation Water Quality by Using 
Principal Component Analysis in an Arsenic Affected Area of Bangladesh. J .Soil .Nature. 
1(2): 08-17 
Ahmed, K.M., Bhattacharya, P., Hasan, M.A., Akhter, S.H., Alam, S.M.M., Bhuyian, M.A.H., 
Imam, M.B., Khan, A.A., Sracek, O.: 2004, ‘Arsenic enrichment in groundwater of the 
alluvial aquifers in Bangladesh: an overview’, Appl. Geochem. 19, 181-200.  
BGS & DPHE (British Geological Survey and Department of Public Health Engineering).: 2001, 
‘Arsenic contamination of groundwater in Bangladesh’ (Eds. D.G. Kinniburgh and 
P.L.Smedley). BGS Technical Report WC/00/19. British Geological Survey, Key worth, UK. 
Hossain, M. and Ahmed, M.: 1999, ‘Ground water quality of Muktagacha aquifer for irrigation’, 
Bangladesh J. of Agril. Res. 24 (1): 141-152. 
Islam, M.R., Jahiruddin, M. and Islam, S.: 2004, ‘Assessment of Arsenic in the water-soil-plant 
systems in Gangetic Floodplains of Bangladesh’, Asian Journal of Plant Science 3(4), 489-493. 
Rahman, M.M. and Zaman, M.W.: 1995, ‘Quality assessment of river and ground waters for 
irrigation at Shahzadpur in Bangladesh’, Progress. Agric. 6 (2): 89-96. 
Tareq, S.M., Safiullah, S., Anawar, H.M., Rahman, M.M., Ishizuka, T.: 2003, ‘Arsenic pollution 
in groundwater: a self-organizing complex geochemical process in the deltaic sedimentary 
environment, Bangladesh’, The Science of Total environment 313, 213-226. 
Zaman, M.W. and Rahman, M.M.: 1997, ‘Rating of ground water quality for irrigation at 
Shahzadpur in Bangladesh’, Bangladesh J. Sci. Ind. Res. 32 (2): 271-276. 
Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) October 1992, Flood Plan Coordination 
Organization. Ministry of Water Resources, Government of the People’s Republic of 
Bangladesh. 
492 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
ASSESSMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT SYSTEM (EMS) AND 
ENVIRONMENTAL ASPECTS/IMPACTS OF SELECTED SCIENTIFIC 
LABORATORIES OF JAHANGIRNAGAR UNIVERSITY, DHAKA, BANGLADESH 
 
 
 
Fayezun Nahar Begum1, S.M. Nazrul Islam2, Tanveer Mehedi Adyel3 
and Muhammad Hafizur Rahman4 
 
 
ABSTRACT: The study was performed to assess the Environmental Management System 
(EMS) and environmental aspects/impacts of some selected scientific laboratories of 
Jahangirnagar University, Dhaka. Data and information were collected through laboratory visit, 
Focus Group Discussion (FGD), questionnaire survey and Key Informative Interview (KII) of 
laboratory in charge, technician, researchers and students. Laboratories of the University have no 
clear knowledge about EMS and hence it was not implemented. Various environmental aspects 
and impacts were found in these laboratories such as surface water, air and soil pollution, unsafe 
mixing and handling of hazardous materials and chemicals, unsustainable storage of chemicals 
and reagents, unsafe use of personal protective equipment etc. The maximum environmental 
impact and pollution was occurred in Chemistry and Botany laboratories, while the minimum 
was in Microbiology and Environmental Sciences laboratories. Although the overall pollution 
level was low, it is urgently need to concern about these environmental aspects and initiative 
should take to comply with EMS in laboratories to reduce environmental pollution and 
sustainable management of environment.  
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Now-a-days Environmental Management System (EMS) is a key to combat pollution in all 
industrial as well as business sector and all types of laboratories where EMS give a systematic 
guideline for all these sectors. Moreover it serves as a tool to improve environmental 
performance, which provides an organized way of managing an organization’s environmental 
affairs (IAF, 2001), and even citizen has emerged as a response to the globally increasing 
environmental demands (BSI, 1992). The key to effective environmental management is the use 
                                                        
1Environment and Safety Officer, Petrobangla, Bangladesh. fayezunnahar@gmail.com 
2Lecturer, Department of Environmental Sciences, Jahangirnagar University, Dhaka-1342, Bangladesh. 
shawun_env_512@yahoo.com 
3Former Student, Department of Environmental Sciences, Jahangirnagar University, Dhaka-1342, 
Bangladesh. tanveeradyel@gmail.com 
4Former Student, Department of Environmental Sciences, Jahangirnagar University, Dhaka-1342, 
Bangladesh. rumon_hafij@yahoo.com 
 
493 
 
of a systematic approach to planning, controlling, measuring and improving an organization's 
environmental performance. The establishment of an EMS as a process forces to better organize, 
priorities and projects and to identify problems and exposures before they occur (Sharif, 2009). 
Most EMS is based on a models (including the ISO 14001 standard) which is built on the “Plan, 
Do, Check, Act” model introduced by Shewart and Deming (also known as Deming cycle). This 
model endorses the concept of continual improvement. In the EMS model, the “Plan, Do, Check, 
Act” steps have been expanded into key elements that are linked together. Most EMS models 
have 17 key elements. These are also known as the 17 requirements of the ISO 14001:2004 
standard. These include: Environmental Policy, Environmental Aspects, Legal and Other 
Requirements, Objectives and Targets, Environmental Management Program, Structure and 
Responsibility, Training, Awareness and Competence, Communication, EMS Documentation, 
Document Control, Operational Control, Emergency Preparedness and Response, Monitoring and 
Measurement, Nonconformance and Corrective and Preventive Action, Records, EMS audit and 
Management review. 
 
Environmental management issues associated with small labs present a unique challenge because  
the fact, that most of today’s environmental requirements are based on regulations designed for 
relatively simple processes in manufacturing (e.g., printing) and service (e.g., dry cleaning) 
entities. In small laboratory, although diverse works are done, environmental management is 
most likely a shared responsibility or administer by part time staff or through collateral duty. The 
uniqueness of small laboratory operations means that traditional approaches to environmental 
management, which may work well with other operations, need careful consideration, and 
possible adjustment, to work well. But these labs have some advantages over larger laboratories 
for establishing an EMS, for example, lines of communication are generally shorter, 
organizational structures are less complex, people perform multiple functions, and access to 
management is simpler. Management and staff are often motivated to spend time and resources 
wisely in here. An EMS helps promote and sustain such efficiency (EPA, 2000). Like any other 
important business activity in a small laboratory, environmental issues must be carefully 
managed. For example, important business activities occurring in small labs address quality, 
finance, human resources, or safety-and have appropriate management systems (EPA, 2000). The 
environmental management issues presented in small laboratories either: (1) represent traditional 
areas with the most environmental management risk for small labs, or (2) are perceived to offer 
the greatest opportunity for environmental performance improvement. 
 
EPA (2000) provides a guideline for implementing EMS in small laboratories. But till now small 
laboratories in our country do not implement EMS or any measurement is not use to measure the 
pollution in small laboratories. It also assumed that scientific laboratories of various academic 
institutions in Bangladesh are not complying with EMS. Two faculties-Physical and 
Mathematical Science and Life Science of Jahangirnagar University have scientific laboratories, 
that are abundantly used chemicals for their academic research. So, it is important to know the 
compliance of EMS of these laboratories. The main goal of this work is to assess the EMS of 
selected scientific laboratories of Jahangirnagar University. But in EMS, environmental aspect 
and impact identification is very crucial. Identifying these, one can easily understand about the 
scenario of EMS. So to reach in the main goal, this experiment considered- to identify the 
environmental aspect and environmental impact of the selected scientific laboratories of 
Jahangirnagar University, and to determine key environmental management issues of the 
laboratories. 
494 
 
2. Materials and Methods 
 
2.1. Data collection 
 
A structured questionnaire was prepared to collect the information regarding EMS of the selected 
laboratories of Jahangirnagar University (JU), Dhaka (Figure 1). Moreover laboratory 
observation, Focus Group Discussion (FGD) and Key Informative Interview (KII) were also 
conducted to fabricate the environmental impact scoring index. 
 
 
Rvnv½xibMi wek ¦we`¨vjq
(2004)
Kg©Pvix‡` i Ac wiKwíZ Avevmb
Avf ¨š —i xY iv¯—v
wcGwUwm mxgvbv
XvK v Avwi Pv gnvmoK
mxg vbv
#
‡fŠZ  AeKvVv‡g v
Rjvkq
‡Ljvi gvV
######
######
###
###
####
#####
#### ##
##
####
####
######
#####
############ ############# ######
###
######
### ##
###
######
###
#
###
####
##
#
# ######
#####
#
##########
####
#######
#
########
###
#######
###
##
##
######
#####
####
#####
# ## ## ###############
##
#########
##
###
####
###
######
############## ##
####### #######
###############
###
###
# #####################
##
##
#
###
# ##
#####
#
##
#
#
###
#####
###
#
#
#
#
#
#
#
0 0.4 0.8
wK .wg.
23°52'00" 23°52'00"
23°52'15" 23°52'15"
23°52'30" 23°52'30"
23°52'45" 23°52'45"
23°53'00" 23°53'00"
23°53'15" 23°53'15"
23°53'30" 23°53'30"
23°53'45" 23°53'45"
90°15'30"
90°15'30"
90°15'45"
90°15'45"
90°16'00"
90°16'00"
90°16'15"
90°16'15"
90°16'30"
90°16'30"
 
 
Ref. Survey of land based on GPS 2005 
Jahangirnagar 
University Map 
(Based on GPS,2005) 
Residence of employee 
Boundary 
Dhaka-Aricha Highway 
PATC Boundary 
Internal Road 
Changeable Structure 
Water Bodies 
Play Ground 
 
  ### 
0                          0.4                      0.8 
km 
 
Figure 1 Map of Jahangirnagar University, Dhaka 
 
 
495 
 
2.2 Environmental aspect/impact scoring worksheet or index 
 
For each product, service or activity (or group of products, services or activities) and each 
element is assigned two scores, based on  
1. The degree of impact, and  
2. Frequency or likelihood of the associated environmental impacts. 
 
Where degree of impact is incorporated as follows: 4=serious (likely to result in severe or 
widespread damage to human health or the environment), 3=moderate, 2=minor, and 1=no 
impact (unlikely to have an adverse impact on human health or the environment). In case of 
frequency/likelihood of impact following score was applied: 4 = continuous (impact occurs on an 
on-going basis), 3=frequent (impact occurs more than once/month), 2=infrequent (impact occurs 
more than once/year but less than once /month), 1=improbable / never (impact has never occurred 
or is highly unlikely to occur). Scores are added for each indicator across the relevant life cycle 
stages to generate a total impact score. Storage indicates the time of storing any chemical or 
material by researcher, which may affect the environment if release accidentally. As like storage,  
mixing indicate the time of mixing any chemical or material with other chemical by researcher, 
which may affect the environment if any accident occur. Use indicate that when a chemical is 
used in research and possibility of these chemical to affect the environment. Waste management 
indicate that if there are any management or treatment process present in the lab and type of 
waste produced which is harmful for health and environment and its possible impact to the 
environment. There are 11 indicators present in the table which are described as follows: 
1. Researcher includes all students, teachers and lab assistant work in the laboratories 
2. Surrounding community indicates the people present in the lab and work in the surrounding 
environment of the lab and researcher 
3. Air quality indicate any air emission occur and its impact the air quality of the lab and 
surrounding area 
4. Possibility of  land or  soil pollution occurred in the surrounding lake area by lab situated 
beside the department is indicated by land/soil 
5.  Surface water indicates the pollution or impact of lake and adjacent connected lake caused 
by laboratories 
6. Ecosystem effect indicate ecosystem of the situated beside the lab 
7. Ground water indicates the impact of ground water pollution in the study area caused by lab 
8. Noise indicates the noise pollution of the lab 
9. Fuels are gas, burner, electricity which are used for various purpose in the lab and any type of 
impact occurred by these  are indicate by fuel 
10. Water use as raw water, distilled water in the lab 
11. Raw materials indicate various type of material used for research and their impact to the 
environment. 
 
Total score of an indicator is the summation of the processes scored of the lab for example-  
For storage score, 3/2 is degree of impact/ frequency of the impact. 
The total score of researcher = Storage + Mixing + Use + Waste Management score 
                                              = 3/2 + 2/3 + 3/4 + 4/4  
                                              = (3+2) + (2+3) + (3+4) + (4+4)  
                                              = 5 + 5 + 7 + 8 
                                              =25 
496 
 
It means the overall score of indicator of researcher in category human health is 25 i.e. laboratory 
has significance impact on human health. Stapleton developed the method of evaluating impact 
score sheet of any organization. 
 
2.3. Significance level of total score 
 
The total score of an indicator is divided into three categories. 
a) Score 8-16 = Low or no significant impact to the environment 
b) Score 17-24 = Moderate significant impact to the environment 
c) Score 25-32 = High significant impact to the environment 
 
 
3. Results and Discussion 
 
From laboratory inspection, questionnaire survey, FGD and KII, an environmental impact score 
index is found for each scientific laboratory which is described as follows with their key 
environmental management issues.  
 
3.1. Department of Chemistry 
 
Department of Chemistry, established in 1973, holds 12 laboratories, of which eight are used for 
thesis and Ph.D. program and other four are used only for honor’s practical lab in the entire year. 
These laboratories are divided into three section- Organic, inorganic and physical chemistry 
laboratory.  
 
3.1.1. Organic chemistry laboratory 
Researchers mainly use various types of acid, bases, salt, resin, polymer, huge amount of water 
(raw and distilled water) etc for their research purpose. In thesis and Ph.D. laboratories, high 
concentration chemicals are used directly. Some of these chemical are highly toxic for human 
health, plants, animals and environment. The toxicity of those chemicals are severe because they 
used those chemical as concentrated level and some of those chemical are listed as hazardous 
toxic substance by OSHA. They use about 5-6 liter of concentrated chemical averagely per day. 
During the work, both solid and liquid wastes are produced. The maximum liquid wastages are 
drained through pipe and discharged into the lake situated in front of the department.  However, 
they try to collect highly concentrated chemical waste in bottle. But this is not always possible. 
Solid waste include broken apparatus, filter paper etc are deposited in the dustbin of the 
laboratory and finally dispose into beside the department. The overall environmental impact score 
of this laboratory is shown in table 1. 
 
In category of human health and environment, it is found that the maximum impact score are 
caused during waste management process whereas in resource use, the maximum score is for 
using of fuel. The minimum individual score of all categories are found for storage and mixing. 
The total score of researcher and surrounding community of the laboratory in category of human 
health is 17 and 18, respectively  which indicated that organic laboratory have moderate 
significant environmental impact on human health. The total score to air quality, noise, 
ecosystem and ground water of the surrounding area indicate that organic laboratory have no 
significant impact to the environment.  
497 
 
3.1.2. Inorganic chemistry laboratory 
Researchers use various types of neutral chemical (e.g. dichloromethane, cyclohexane etc) for 
their research purpose and also use huge amount of water (raw and distilled water). The toxicity 
of those chemicals is less and no remarkable wastes are produced from this lab. The overall 
environmental impact score of this laboratory are shown in table 1. 
From table 1, it is found that all indicator of the inorganic lab have a score in the range of 8-16 
which indicate low significance level of impact i.e. inorganic lab have no significant 
environmental impact.   
 
3.1.2. Physical chemistry laboratory 
Both solid and liquid wastes are produced during research work in this laboratory. Liquid 
effluents are drained into surrounding lake of the university. The overall environmental impact 
score of this laboratory are shown in table 1. All indicators of physical laboratory have a score in 
the range of 8-16 which indicate low significance level of impact i.e. physical lab cause low 
environmental pollution.  
  
3.2. Department of Environmental Sciences 
 
There are two general laboratories in this department. In biological laboratory both micro and 
macro biological test are done. Different types of agar or media was used here. In chemistry 
laboratory, various types of acids, bases and salt are frequently used. The overall toxicity of those 
chemicals is less. All the indicators of the Environmental Sciences laboratory have a score of 8-
12 indicating low significance level of impact. That means, the overall pollution caused by 
Environmental Sciences lab is comparatively low.  
 
3.3. Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology 
 
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology has two laboratories. The overall 
environmental aspect/impact score of laboratories of this department is shown in table 1. Like 
Environmental Sciences, all indicators of these laboratories have a score 8-12 that fall in the 
range of 8-16 indicating low significance level of impact.  
 
3.4. Department of Botany 
 
Department of Botany consists six laboratories viz., plant ecology conservation, plant tissue 
culture, plant pathology, plant physiology, plant breeding, and plant systematic laboratory. 
Various chemicals, nutrient agars, pesticides, fertilizer alcohols etc are used in these laboratories 
round the year. The total score of researcher and in category of human health is 20 which indicate 
that this laboratory have moderate significant environmental impact on human health. The 
surrounding communities have a score of 13 which indicate low significant environmental 
impact. The total air quality (20) of the lab and ecosystem (20) of the lake and surrounding area 
indicate that laboratory have moderate significant impact to the environment. Except these two 
indicators of environment, all indicators of both environment and resource uses have score 
between 8 and 14 which indicate that lab may have low significant environmental impact. In 
category of resource use, the score of fuels (16).  
 
 
498 
 
3.5. Department of Microbiology 
 
Department of Microbiology contains two laboratories. After microbiological test, all material 
and equipment are autoclaved to remove pathological contamination. Except researcher in human 
health category all indicators have a score ranged from 8 to 14 that indicate low significant 
pollution to the environment. But researcher has a score of 20 which indicate that lab has 
moderate significant impact to human health.  
 
3.6. Department of Pharmacy  
 
Department of Pharmacy has three laboratories-two common practical and one thesis 
laboratories. From the table 1, it is found that except air quality indicator, all other indicators of 
the laboratories have a score of 8-12, which indicate low significance impact of the environment.  
 
3.7. Department of Zoology 
 
Department of Zoology holds two common practical and three thesis laboratories. Thesis 
laboratories are divided into three part- entomology, fisheries and wild life. But maximum 
research work was done outside of the Jahangirnagar University. The overall environmental 
impact score of this laboratory are shown in table 1. Except indicator of researcher, all indicators 
fall into the range of 8-14 which indicate low significance environmental impact to the 
environment. But working of researcher in category human health has score of 20 which indicate 
that the lab process moderate impact on environment which is harmful for health. The maximum 
individual score is also from researcher activity in lab i.e. using chemical and waste management 
processes have impact on environment. From the above result, it is found that the selected 
laboratories of Jahangirnagar University have impact on environment.  
 
Table 1 Environmental aspects/impacts score sheet of selected laboratories of JU 
 
Human 
Heath 
Category 
Environment Category Resource Use 
Category 
                 Indicators 
 
 Department    
RS SC AQ LS SW EE GW N F W RM 
Chemistry (Organic) 17 18 12 20 20 14 8 8 16 10 12 
Chemistry (Inorganic) 10 10 8 12 12 10 8 8 12 10 12 
Chemistry (Physical) 10 10 12 12 12 10 12 8 12 10 12 
Environmental 
Sciences 
10 10 12 12 12 10 8 8 12 10 12 
Biochemistry & 
Molecular Biology 
10 10 12 12 12 10 8 8 12 10 12 
Botany 20 13 20 14 14 20 8 12 12 10 12 
Microbiology  20 13 8 14 14 14 8 12 12 10 12 
Pharmacy  10 10 20 12 12 10 8 12 12 10 12 
Zoology  20 13 8 14 14 14 8 12 12 10 12 
 
[RS: Researcher; SC: Surrounding community; AQ: Air Quality; LS: Land/Soil; SW: Surface 
Water; EE: Ecosystem Effects; N: Noise; F: Fuels; W: Water, RM: Raw Materials] 
499 
 
The overall environmental impacts of all laboratories are shown in table 2.  
 
Table 2 Pollution index of selected laboratories of different department of JU 
 
Name of Department Air 
Pollution 
Soil 
Pollution 
Noise 
Pollution 
Surface 
Water 
Pollution 
Ground 
Water 
Pollution 
Chemistry ** ** ++ ** ++ 
Environmental Sciences ++ ++ ++ ** ++ 
Biochemistry & Molecular 
Biology 
++ ** ++ ** ++ 
Pharmacy  ** ++ ++ ** ++ 
Zoology ++ ** ++ ** ++ 
Botany ** ** ++ ** ++ 
Microbiology ++ ++ ++ ** ++ 
Legend 
Low ++ 
Medium ** 
High  
Very high  
Severe   
    
 
From the index, it is found that Chemistry and Botany laboratories have significant 
environmental pollution in air, soil and surface water.  Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, 
Pharmacy and Zoology cause less than Chemistry and Botany laboratories. The main 
environmental impact of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology and Zoology laboratories are soil 
and surface water pollution and pharmacy have cause air and surface water pollution. 
Environmental sciences and microbiology laboratories have low pollution than all other 
laboratories. The pollution level of all laboratories of Jahangirnagar University can be shown as 
follow: Organic Chemistry laboratory> Physical and Inorganic Chemistry laboratory> Botany> 
Zoology>Biochemistry and Molecular Biology>Pharmacy>Microbiology> Environmental 
Sciences. It is also found that surface water pollution is caused by all laboratories. All 10 
artificial lakes of Jahangirnagar University are connected to each other and pollution of one lake 
may harmful for other. But ground water pollution is not easy possible because in this area, 
ground water is found in deep aquifer. From the observation and discussion, it is found that the 
selected 10 laboratories do not implement environmental management system and they have no 
idea about it. So, it needed to concern them about EMS and to implement EMS in the 
laboratories. 
 
 
4. Conclusion 
 
EMS is a vital issue in industrial and environmental development. The Environmental 
Management for Small Laboratories helps small labs for good environmental management. The 
purpose of this study was to identify the presence of EMS as well as environmental aspects and 
impacts of the scientific laboratories of Jahangirnagar University. No EMS is present in all 
500 
 
laboratories and various environmental impacts and aspects are identified which may cause 
pollution of different segment of environment. Main environmental aspect and impact of all labs 
is wastewater containing chemical discharge in the nearby lake. Other aspects are material 
storage and handling, solid waste, soil pollution etc. Chemistry and Botany laboratories cause 
higher of pollution than other laboratories. Zoology, Pharmacy and Biochemistry & Molecular 
Biology laboratories may cause medium pollution whereas Environmental sciences and 
Microbiology cause less pollution than other laboratories. However, the overall environmental 
impacts are low but it is urgently needed to implement the EMS in the laboratories and determine 
the actual rate of pollution and impact of the laboratories. 
  
 
References 
 
BSI (1992). BSI 7750, Specification for Environmental Management systems, British Standards 
Institution, London. 
Drive, E.H. and Champaign, H. (2008) WMRC (Waste Management and Research Centre), A 
Division of Illinois Department of Natural Resources. Available at: http://www.wmrc.uiuc.edu 
EPA (2000). Environmental Management Guide for Small Laboratories. U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency, Small Business Division, Washington, DC. 
IAF (2001). Guidelines on the accreditation of certification bodies for EMS', International 
Accreditation Forum, www.iaf.nu, Australia. 
Leslie, K. The History of Environmental Management Systems: How Contributor? available at 
http://www.ehow.com/about_5197303_history-environmental-management-systems.html 
(Access on   March07,  2011 , 11:46:08) 
Martin, R. (1998). ISO 14001 Guidance manual. National Center for Environmental Decision 
Making Research.  
Sharif, M.A. (2009). An Introduction to Environmental Management System (EMS) and ISO 
14001, Workshop to the Amman Chamber of Industry, The Higher Council for Science and 
Technology, Jordan 
Stapleton, P.J. and Margaret, A.G. (2001). Environmental Management Systems: An 
Implementation Guide for Small and Medium-Sized Organizations, Glover-Stapleton 
Associates, Inc., Grassonville. 
Karn, G.B. (2009). Learn the basics of how to use PDCA, the very first quality improvement and 
effective project management tool in your arsenal when implementing kaizen.  
501 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
INVESTIGATION ON LAND RECLAMATION IN CHAR ISLANDS OF BANGLADESH 
USING MATHEMATICAL MODELLING TOOL: A CASE STUDY ON CHAR MAINKA 
AND MONTAZ AREA 
 
 
Mohammad Ziaur Rahman1 and Golam Mohiuddin2 
 
 
ABSTRACT: Land reclamation, usually known as reclamation, is the process to create new land 
from sea or riverbeds. The land reclaimed is known as reclamation ground or landfill. Land 
accretion and erosion in the Meghna Estuary is a continuous and gradual natural process. Land 
accretion and erosion in the Meghna Estuary is a continuous and gradual natural process.  The 
net average annual natural accretion is quite significant in the estuary ranging 1200 ha/y to 1900 
ha/y (MES, 2001). Natural accretion at the south of Bhola, Hatiya-Nijhum Dwip and Noakhali 
area is very distinct. In Bangladesh, land reclamation by closure or cross-dam construction in 
order to accelerate the natural accretion process started in 1956 - 57. However it is seen that 
physical intervention is needed in order to accelerate the rate and area for this land hungry 
country. Regularly received satellite imageries and other tangible supporting evidences suggest 
that Bangladesh is about to receive the gift of a huge land mass from its adjoining sea. But it will 
depend considerably on what the Bangladeshis themselves do - like the people of Holland did -- 
to reclaim land from the sea to be joined to the mainland. Already, a substantial land mass has 
surfaced off the shore of Bangladesh on some of these completely surfaced land masses human 
habitations are growing while others emerge during the ebbing of the tide and go under water 
during the tides. The latter types of land formations could be elevated to be permanently joined to 
the mainland by engineering to step up the land accretion process. Indeed, much of present day 
Bangladesh including the districts of Faridpur, Barisal, Noakhali, Patuakhali, etc., were formed, 
over time in this manner. Land masses have already emerged from the sea and more would rise in 
the future. But the natural process being slow and it can be accelerated by engineering, which is 
neither prohibitive in cost terms nor complex, in technology terms. For Bangladesh, it would 
require establishment of structures like cross dams to speed up the silt deposition pace in accreted 
or nearly accreted areas. Under Estuary Development Program (EDP) study the Bay of Bengal 
Model has been updated using the recent bathymetric and hydrometric data and it has been 
applied to ascertain the hydrodynamic and morphological processes of the Meghna Estuary at 
present and to assess land accretion for potential engineering interventions in Char Mainka- 
Montaz area. In this study, three cross-dams have been considered at the middle of 3 channels: 
Bestin channel, Mainka channel and Montaz channel. Model results show that a natural accretion 
process get accelerated as a result of these cross-dams.  
                                                        
1Junior Engineer, Coast Port and Estuary Management Division, Institute of Water Modeling (IWM), 
Dhaka, Bangladesh. zia@iwmbd.org  
2Junior Engineer, Coast Port and Estuary Management Division, Institute of Water Modelling (IWM),    
Dhaka, Bangladesh. gom@iwmbd.org 
502 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Land accretion and erosion in the Meghna Estuary is a continuous and gradual natural process. 
Enormous volume (approximately 1.1 billion ton) of sediment is transported to the Bay of Bengal 
through the Lower Meghna River and give rise to natural accretion in the shallow water area of 
Meghna Estuary. However it is seen that physical intervention is needed in order to accelerate the 
rate and area for this land hungry country.  
 
In Bangladesh, land reclamation by closure or the cross dam construction in order to promote 
accretion process started in 1956-57. The first such dam was built over a dying branch of the 
Meghna River, which is known as Noakhali Cross-dam 1. The length of the cross-dam was 13 km. 
The second cross dam having 30 km length was constructed in 1964 connecting Char Jabbar 
Island to the Noakhali mainland. About 1,000 sq. km lands were reclaimed due to the 
construction of these two cross-dams. 
 
To assess the potential of land reclamation in the Meghna Estuary, Land Reclamation Project 
(LRP) and Meghna Estuary Study (MES) were carried out. Based on the LRP and the MES 
findings, Bangladesh Water Development Board made a priority list of 19 potential cross-dam 
sites for accelerating the natural processes of land accretion. Under Estuary Development 
Program (EDP) study the Bay of Bengal Model has been updated using the recent bathymetric 
and hydrometric data and it has been applied to ascertain the hydrodynamic and morphological 
processes of the Meghna Estuary at present and to assess land accretion for potential engineering 
interventions in Char Mainka- Montaz area. In this study, three cross-dams have been considered 
at the middle of 3 channels: Bestin channel, Mainka channel and Montaz channel. Model results 
show that a natural accretion process in this area under baseline condition and this accretion 
process get accelerated as a result of these cross-dams. These cross-dams will connect Char 
Montaz, Char Rustom, Char Bangla and Char Islam with Bhola Island and will reclaim 
considerable land in the area as well as improve the communication of the Char people without 
causing any adverse impacts on the surrounding water environment.  The potential land 
accretion is about 493 hectres over a period of seven years as a result of construction of the 
proposed cross-dams. 
 
 
2. Approach and Methodology 
 
The study has mainly focused on the processes of river and estuarine hydraulics and the erosion-
deposition pattern of the potential accretion zone and net flow and sediment distribution in the 
different channels of the Meghna estuary. The modelling study has been devised in combination 
with data analysis and numerical modelling. The two dimensional (2-D) flexible mesh model 
(MIKE21 FM) has been applied for hydro-morphological investigation around the study area. 
Data on recent bathymetry, sediment concentration and hydrometrics of the estuary have been 
utilized for updating and re-calibrating the existing Bay of Bengal model and establishing 
baseline conditions.  
The Bay of Bengal model domain extends from Chandpur on the Lower Meghna river in the 
north to about 160 Latitude in the Bay of Bengal in the south. There are two open boundaries in 
the model, one is in the Lower Meghna River at Chandpur (northern boundary) and another one 
is in the Bay of Bengal (southern boundary). Predicted tide has been used in the southern 
503 
 
boundary and observed water level at Chandpur BIWTA Station has been used in the northern 
boundary. 
The riverbank alignment (land boundary) in the northern part of the model has been updated on 
the basis of the mosaic of IRS P6 LISS III satellite image 2008 provided by EDP. The model 
applies PWD datum, which is equivalent to 0.46 m SoB. The southern part of the Bay of Bengal 
is quite deep and the maximum depth along the southern open boundary is more than 3,000 meter. 
The computational grid or mesh size decreases (or the resolution increases) towards coastlines 
and Islands. Inter-tidal areas are flooded and dried during a tidal cycle, both in nature and in the 
model.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1 Computational mesh and bathymetry of dedicated Bay of Bengal model 
 
2.1. Dedicated Model Development 
 
The dedicated model for Char Mainka-Montaz area in the south of Bhola island has been 
developed to establish baseline hydrodynamic and morphological conditions in and around this 
place, to identify the suitable locations for cross-dams, to assess the impact of the proposed cross-
dams on hydrodynamic and morphological conditions and to forecast short-term morphological 
change and land accretion due to different options of cross-dams. In this dedicated model the 
computational mesh has been made finer at the area of interest with respect to 2D General Model 
in order to incorporate different options of cross-dam and to assess their impacts at the 
surrounding area of those cross-dams. Figure 1 shows the computational mesh and bathymetry of 
Mainka-Montaz area. Other model setup has been kept same as 2D General Model. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
504 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2 Computational mesh and bathymetry of dedicated model at area of interest  
 
2.2. Model Calibration 
 
The dedicated model for Mainka-Montaz area has been calibrated with the monsoon 2009 and 
dry season 2010 data. Figure 3 shows the locations of measured data which have been used for 
calibration. The calibration results are shown in figure 4 to 6. All of these figures show 
reasonable agreement between the measured and simulated discharge in Mainka-Montaz area.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
            
 
 
 
 
Figure 3 Calibration locations of Mainka-Montaz model 
 
 
505 
 
 
 
Figure 3 Calibration results of Mainka-Montaz dedicated model on water level 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          Figure 4 Calibration results of Mainka-Montaz dedicated model on water level 
      
Figure 5 Calibration results of Mainka-Montaz dedicated model on discharge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6 Calibration results of Mainka-Montaz dedicated model on sediment concentration 
Montaz Channel (East), Wet 2009 Mainka Channel (South-East), Wet 2009 
  
Montaz Channel, Wet 2009 Mainka Channel, Wet 2009 
506 
 
2.3. Establishment of Baseline Condition 
 
The baseline condition of the Char Mainka-Montaz area has been analysed on the basis of local 
tide, current speed, wave, discharge and sediment transport. In this study, the hydrological year of 
2009-10 has been considered as the base period. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7 Maximum Water level in Mainka-Montaz area in Base condition 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8 Maximum Current Speed in Mainka-Montaz area in Base condition 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9 Residual flow and mean current speed in Mainka-Montaz area in Base condition 
 
507 
 
The area is dominated by tides generated in the Bay of Bengal. The flows from the West 
Shahbazpur channel and Tetulia Channel have also some influence on the flow inside Mainka and 
Montaz channels. Water level and current speed in the area have been simulated by the Mainka-
Montaz dedicated model and the maximum maps in the wet period are shown in Figure 7 and 8. 
A residual flow map on the basis of August 2009 model simulations has been shown in Figure 9.  
 
From the figures it is evident that the current speed is very small (0.1-0.3m/s) in Bestin and 
Bangla channels and moderate in Mainka and Montaz channels (0.3-0.7m/s). The current speed 
in Bura Gouranga channel varies from 0.5 to 0.9m/s while it varies from 0.5 to 1.5m/s in the 
Kukri Mukri Channel. The residual flow in the Mainka and Montaz channels is from western 
towards east direction i.e. from Bura Gouranga to Kukri Mukri channel. 
 
 
3. Selection of Potential Locations of Land Reclamation 
 
After hydrodynamic simulation of five different options in the Mainka-Montaz area one option 
has been taken for morphologic simulation. This option comprised of three potential cross-dams 
in the middle of Bestin, Mainka and Montaz channels. These cross-dams will connect Char 
Montaz, Char Rustom, Char bangla and Char Islam with Bhola Island, reclaim considerable land 
in the area and improve communication of the char people.     
1. Bestin + Mainka closed (Mainka approximately at the middle of the channel) 
2. Bestin + Mainka closed (Mainka approximately at the western end of the channel) 
3. Bestin + Mainka + Montaz closed (all approximately at the middle of the channel) 
4. Bestin + Mainka + Montaz closed (Mainka approximately at the middle of the channel, 
Montaz at eastern end) 
5. Bestin + Mainka + Montaz closed (Mainka approximately at the middle of the channel, 
Montaz at western end) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10 Potential cross dam sites 
508 
 
4. Result Analysis 
 
Three cross-dams have been proposed at the middle of Bestin, Mainka and Montaz channels. The 
construction of these cross dams will accelerate the deposition process in the area. Figure 11 
represents the changed bathymetry after 3 years of model simulation without and with the cross-
dams. From the figure it is evident that the deposition process will be increased by construction 
of the cross-dam. Moreover, the land reclamation in the area will also enhance the 
communication in this char area. Accreted land after 3 and 7 years with and without cross-dam 
above +1.5 mPWD is shown in Table 1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11 Land accretion after 3 years without (left) and with (right) cross-dams 
 
Table 1 Example Land accretion due to cross-dam (Above +1.5 mPWD) 
 
Year Future with no cross dams 
(Hectares) 
Future with cross dams 
(Hectares) 
Benefit due to cross dams 
(Hectares) 
3 8 187 179 
7 21 493 472 
 
 
5. Conclusion 
 
Simulation of morphological model for three consecutive years to assess the morphological 
changes is very complex and time consuming. In this study, the model has been simulated for 
some time in dry period and then with updated bathymetry simulation for next period is made. 
The model has been simulated for three years in this procedure and from the results seven years 
development has been determined. 
Bangladesh is likely to get a positive response for funds as well as technical support from the 
international community if it can show that it is really keen to reclaim land from the sea for the 
overpopulated country. But we have to put the endeavor under a systematic policy framework. 
Holland is one country with unmatched expertise and experience in obtaining land out of the sea. 
509 
 
It was in a situation, much worse than Bangladesh. Holland was below the sea level for which 
high tides and storms in the sea used to completely inundate it. The Dutch engineering solved 
these problems. They have also permanently reclaimed vast stretches of land from the sea to keep 
them dry within secure barriers or sea walls. 
 
 
Acknowledgement 
 
The authors express their gratitude to Institute of Water Modelling (IWM) for the support to use 
their joint study findings in the paper. 
 
 
References 
 
DHV-Haskoning (2010). Sandwip-Urirchar-Noakhali (SUN) Cross-dams Conceptual Design.  
DHV Counsultants BV (2001). Hydro-morphological Dynamics of the Meghna Estuary (MES II)  
IWM 2009. Survey and Modelling Study of Sandwip-Urirchar-Noakhali Cross-Dam(s), Final    
Report. submitted to Char Development and Settlement Project-III (CDSP-III) by IWM. 
O’ Brien, M.P., (1969). Equilibrium Flow Areas of Inlets on Sandy Coast, Journal of the Water 
Ways and Harbours, DIV, Proc. ASCE. 
O’ Conor, B.A., Nicholson, J. (1989). Modelling Changes in Coastal Morphology. Proc. A.S.C.E. 
Int. Symposium on Sediment Transport Modelling, S.Y. Wang (Ed.), pp. 160165. 
SWMC 2001. Two-dimensional General Model of the Meghna Estuary, Second Update Report, 
submitted to Meghna Estuary Study (MES) by Surface Water Modelling Center.   
U.S Army Corps of Engineers. Coastal Engineering Manual.  
 
 510 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
FRESHWATER MOLLUSCS IN THE NORTHEASTERN REGION OF BANGLADESH 
 
 
Mahiuddin Md. Shahjahan Bhuiyan1, Md. Sarwar Jahan2, Md. Redwanur Rahman 3and Minu 
Haque4 
 
 
ABSTRACT: The Northeastern region of Bangladesh (Brahmanbaria, Comilla, Habiganj, 
Maulvibazar, Sylhet and Sunamganj districts) is naturally reach with biodiversity hills, valleys, 
streams, lakes, rivers, haors, plain land, and green forest. A total 46 freshwater molluscs 
belonging to 14 families have been recorded in the Northeastern Region of Bangladesh. Of which 
18 species are recorded from the first time of Bangladesh. Among 47 aquatic mollusc species, 
Bellamya bengalensis, Brotia costula, Melanoides tuberculata, Tarebia granifera, Lamellidens 
marginalis, Lamellidens corrianus, Parreysia favidens were ubiquitous species throughout the 
study area. Novaculina gangetica, Stenothyra deltae, Bithynia (Diagoniostoma) cerameopoma, 
Bithynia (Diagoniostoma) pulchella were encountered in Gomoti river, Comilla only. 
Lamellidens indawgyensis was only found in Chatla Beel and the Surma River. Parreysia 
(Parreysia) favidens var. viridula, Parreysia (Parreysia) gowhattensis, Parreysia (Radiatula) 
andersoniana were found in single habitat (Khushiyara river). Radix persica was found in Paddy 
field at Companyganj in Sylhet district. Physa acuta was found in polluted ditches in Srimongal, 
(Maulvibazar district).  
   Five Rivers (Lotic habitats) and five ponds (Lentic habitats) of the study area were surveyed 
purposively during the tenure of two years to determine influences of soil components and 
physico-chemical parameters of water on distribution, population density and to estimate 
biodiversity indices of mollusc species. Pearson correlation among population density of 
molluscs and soil and Physio-chemical parameters of water were measured.  
   In River habitat, Maximum population density (8.56/m2) was estimated in Gomoti River, 
Comilla and minimum population density (3.26/m2) in Titas River, Brahmanbaria. In pond 
habitat maximum population, density (11.93/m2) was recorded in the pond of Sylhet district and 
minimum population density (1.78/m2) in the Habiganj district. 
   In the river Khushyara the highest Shannon-Wiener diversity index (H′) (2.30) was found in 
Sylhet district and lowest (1.62) in Titas River in Brahmonbaria district and highest Margalef's 
species richness (d) (3.49) where the number of species was almost highest. In the pond habitat 
the highest Shannon-Weiner diversity index (H′) (1.84) was found in the pond of Habiganj 
                                                
1 Assistant Professor, Barura Shahid Smriti Govt.College, Comilla, e-mail: sbhuiyan72@yahoo.com 
2,3 Institute of Environmental Science, University of Rajshahi,,  Rajshahi-6205, Bangladesh. 
    email: redwan_rahman_iesru@yahoo.com 
4  Lecturer, Dr. Khandaker  Mosharraf  Hossain College, Daudkandi , Comilla, Bangladesh.    
 511 
 
district and lowest in Sylhet district (0.97) and highest Margalef's species richness (d) (2.63) was 
found in pond of Habiganj and lowest species richness d (0.97) in pond of Sylhet district. 
   Pearson correlation among population density aquatic mollusc species (rivers) and soil 
parameters showed that population density is positively correlated with soil pH, OM (Organic 
Matter), Ca, and Mg, but negatively correlated with Fe,P,Cu,Mn and Zn. 
   Pearson correlation among population density aquatic mollusc species (Pond) and soil 
parameters showed that population density is positively correlated with soil pH ,OM, Ca, N, Fe 
and Zn but negatively correlated with K and Cu. 
 
Key Words: Mollusca, Biodiversity, Indices, Freshwater, Population, Soil quality, Water quality 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Natural ecosystem is progressively being destroyed, leading to a loss of Biodiversity. A total 1.4 
million living species have been recorded (Wilson, 1998), of which, about 135,000 are molluscs 
and of these more than 2,000 are known to be at risk of extinction (Seddon et al., 1998). The 
Moluscs Specialist Group (MSG) of the World Conservation Union (International Union for 
Conservation Nature) provides advice and data to the Species Survival Commission (SSC) of the 
IUCN, and through it, to IUCN Conservation Program for Sustainable Development.  The aim of 
this Program is to ensure the conservation of natural resources within the concept of sustainable 
development. 
   Our knowledge on freshwater molluscs on northeastern region of Bangladesh is very scanty and 
there is no sufficient record available here regarding the biodiversity, taxonomy, ecology and 
population density of molluscs. In Bangladesh, Alam and Patra (1986) studied on the freshwater 
molluscan fauna of Chittagong Division with their ecology. Jahan (1993) worked on some 
terrestrial and freshwater gastropods of Bangladesh with their ecological notes. Jahan et al., 
(1990 & 1998) worked on population density and molluscan biodiversity of Sundarbans, 
Bangladesh. Jahan and Rahman (2000) experimented on Biodiversity of the Aquatic habitats of 
Rajshahi Metropolitan City, Bangladesh with special emphasis on interactions among the soil 
substratum, plant and snail species.  Rahman et al., (2003) studied species composition, abundance 
and distribution of Freshwater molluscs in a pond of Bangladesh Agricultural University 
Campus, Mymensingh. 
   The objective of this study were to determine population density, biodiversity, biodiversity 
indices such as Shanon-Wiener index, Species richness, Community dominance and Evenness, 
the relationship between mollusc communities and Physico-chemical parameters of water and 
soil in the Rivers and Ponds of the Northeastern Region of Bangladesh. 
 
2. Methodology 
 
2.1 Study area 
 
The Northeastern region includes the present districts of Brahmanbaria, Comilla, Habiganj, 
Moulvibazar, Sylhet and Sunamganj. This region covers a land area of 13,938.65 Square Kilometer 
situated between 23°2´ to 25°2´ N latitude and longitude 91°7  ´to 92°41´E. This region abounds in 
freshwater systems including wetlands in the floodplains crossed by rivers like Surma, Khusiyara, 
 512 
 
Peeyain, Saree, Gowain, Khowai, Sonai, Meghana, Titas, Gomoti and their tributaries, tanks, streams, 
pools and marshes. 
 
2.2 Population study  
 
Considering the limitations of time, resources, and logistic supports, five Ponds each from the 
Districts of Brahmanbaria, Comilla, Habiganj, Maulvibazar and Sylhet as example of lentic 
habitat and five sampling spots each in the river  Surma, Khusiyara, Ratna, Titas and Gomoti 
representing lotic habitat were selected for determination of population density, Biodiversity and 
Biodiversity indices of freshwater molluscs.  Three sites were selected in each of the river and 
pond. Again, from each site three quadrates of one (1) m2 area of each were taken according to 
the depth of water (viz.0-50cm, 50-100cm and 100-200cm) in respect of Summer, Monsoon and 
Winter season. A total of 540 quadrates were explored in course of two years (2005-2007) study 
period.  
 
2.3 Toxonomic Study 
 
For taxonomic identification of freshwater molluscs keys can be found in Subba Rao (1984) and 
Mitra et al., (2005) unidentified species are taken to be Zoological Survey of India (ZSI) for 
confirmation of species. Population densities were determined according to following formula 
(Michael, 1990; Sukla and Chandal, 2000). 
 
2.4 Physico-Chemical Study 
 
The standard method Peterson (2002) was followed for the determination of soil parameters. 
Organic Carbon was first determined by volumetrically wet oxidation method by Walkey and 
Black’s (1934). The organic matter was oxidized by I N K2CrO7and the amount of organic carbon 
in the aliquot was determination by titration against 1N FeSo4 solution in presence of diphenyl 
amine indicator (Nelson & Sommers, 1982). Then soil organic matter content was calculated by 
multiplying the percent value of the Organic Carbon with conventional Van Bemmelen factor, 
1.73 (Piper, 1950). Soil P was extracted by shaking with 0.5 NNaHCo3 solution having pH 8.5 
following the method described by Olsen & Sommers, 1982). Sulphur (S) was extracted by 
15%CaCl2 solution and determined by turbidimetrically using BaCl2.2H2O and polyvenyl 
pyrrolidone (Page et al., 1982.) The value of hydrogen ion concentration (pH) of pond and River 
water was determined by using a digital pH meter (Model Hanna instrument HI 98107). The 
volume of sodium thiosulphate used in titration up to end point gave the DO value of water 
expressed in milligram of oxygen per litre of water (mg/l) (Michael, 1990).  
 
2.5 Study of Diversity Indices 
 
Method adopted to determine the Shannon–Weaver index (a measure of diversity). Among the 
quantitative description of diversity available, Shannon–Weaver index is based on information 
theory (Odum, 1971).  
 
 513 
 
3. Results 
 
A total of 46 species viz., Bellamya bengalensis type typical, Bellamya bengalensis race doliaris, 
Bellamya dissimilis, Bellamya crassa, Pila globosa, Pila virens,  Bithynia (Diagoniostoma) 
cerameopoma,   Bithynia (D.) pulchella, Gabbia orcula var. product,  Stenothyra deltae,  Physa 
acuta,  Thiara scabra, Melanoides tuberculata, Tarebia granifera,  Tarebia lineate,  Brotia 
costula,  Paludomus conica, Lymnaea (Pseudosuccninea) acuminate, L. (P.) f. gracilior, L. (P.) 
luteola f. typical, L. (P.) luteola f. Ovalis, Radix persica, Indoplanorbis exustus, Gyraulus 
convexiusculus, Scapula deltae,  Lamellidens marginalis, Lamellidens jenkinsianus, Lamellidens 
jenkinsianus sub .sp .daccaensis, Lamellidens phenchooganjensis, Lamellidens indawgyiensis, 
Lamellidens generosus, Lamellidens corrianus,  Parreysia (Radiatula) andersonia, Parreysia 
(Radiatula) bonneaudi, Parreysia (Radiatula) lima, Parreysia (Radiatula) shurtleffiana,    
Parreysia (Radiatula) caerulea, Parreysia (Parreysia) favidens, Parreysia (Parreysia) favidens 
var. assamensis, Parreysia (Parreysia) favidens var. marcens , Parreysia (Parreysia) favidens 
var.viridula, Parreysia (Parreysia) corrugate, Parreysia (Parreysia) gowhattensis, Novaculina 
gangeica, Corbicula striatella, Corbicula sylhetica belonging to 14 families have been recorded 
from five rivers and ponds in the Northeastern Region of Bangladesh. 
 
3.1 Population 
 
In aquatic habitat B. bengalensis f. typica, B. costula, L. marginalis, Corbicula striatella, M. 
tuberculata, T. scabra, T.lineata, L. phanchooganjensis and L. corrianus were ubiquitous.  
Mollusc species population density (no. /m2) in different habitat of the study area are shown in 
Table 1. On an average the maximum population density (8.56/m2) was recorded in the Gomoti 
river of Comilla district and minimum (3.26/m2) in the Titas river of Brahmonbaria district. In 
pond habitat maximum population density (11.93 /m2) was recorded in the pond of Sylhet district 
and minimum (1.78/ m2) in the pond of Habiganj district (Table 1). 
 
3.2 Molluscan Diversity Indices 
 
Table 2 shows that the highest Shannon-Weiner diversity index (H= 2.30) was found in the river 
Khushyara in Sylhet district and lowest (H= 1.62) in the river Titas, in Brahmanbaria district; 
highest index of dominance (c=0.23) in Gomti river in Comilla district and lowest in (c=0.13) 
Ratna river in Habiganj district; the highest species richness (d=3.49) in Khushyara river in 
Sylhet  and lowest (d=2.14) in Titas river in Brahmonbaria ; the highest relative diversity or 
evenness (e=0. 88) in Ratna river in Habiganj and lowest in (e=0.77) Titas river in Brahmanbaria 
district.  
3.3 Population Ecology 
 
Determination of distribution and abundance of molluscs species and the influence of the 
environmental factors on them in the north-eastern region of Bangladesh in the general aim of the 
study. Pearson correlation among population density (Table 1) of molluscs and soil and soil and 
physico-cheical parameters (Table 3 & 4) were measured. In course of the present study in the 
Districts of the North-eastern region of Bangladesh viz. Comilla, Maulvibazar, Sylhet it was 
found that land mollusc depend on rainfall, temperature and soil parameters.  Population density 
of T. scabra was highest (9.33/ m2)   in Summer, pond in Sylhet and lowest (0.77/ m2) in 
 514 
 
monsoon, pond in Hazigang. The highest (4.71/ m2) and lowest (0.77/ m2) population density of 
B. costula was estimate in summer, pond of Comilla and monsoon, pond of Moulvibazar 
respectively.  
 
Table 1 Average population densities of mollusc species obtained from different habitats of 
North-eastern Region of Bangladesh during the survey made in three seasons of the two 
consecutive years (2005-2007). 
 
Habitats 
 
 
Districts 
River 
(Population 
density 
no. /m2) 
Recorded 
species in 
Rivers 
(In parenthesis) 
Ponds 
(Population 
density 
no. /m2) 
Recorded species 
in Ponds 
(In parenthesis) 
Brahmanbaria 3.26  1.1 
(Titas  River) 
Titas  River(8) 
 
3.931.8 Pond in 
Brahmanbaria (4) 
Comilla 8.56  4.94  
(Gomti River) 
Gomti 
River(13) 
4.853.01 Pond in Comilla 
(4) 
Habiganj 3.490.85 
(Ratna River) 
 
Ratna River(12) 
1.780.46 Pond in Habiganj 
(8) 
Maulvibazar ND ND 1.370.81 Pond in 
Maulvibazar(3) Sylhet 5.831.8  
(Surma River) 
 
Surma 
River(15) 
11.9311.05 Pond in Sylhet (5) 
Sylhet 
(Fenchoganj) 
4.561.40 
(Khushyara 
River) 
 
Khushyara 
River (16) 
ND Sylhet 
(Fenchoganj) 
 
Table 2 Calculated Biodiversity indices of mollusc species in respect of habitats in the 
Northeastern Region of Bangladesh. 
 
River Pond   Habitats 
 
 
Biodiversity 
 Indices 
TR GR RR SR KR Comilla B.Baria H.ganj M.bazar Sylhet 
H 1.62 1.94 2.20 2.13 2.30 0.85 1.18 1.84 0.94 0.67 
C 0.23 0.19 0.13 0.16 0.14 0.54 0.34 0.18 0.43 0.60 
D 2.14 2.54 2.95 3.13 3.49 1.01 1.16 2.63 1.45 0.97 
E 0.77 0.76 0.88 0.79 0.83 0.61 0.85 0.88 0.85 0.41 
(Note: H= Shannon-Wiener diversity index, C = Simpson’s index of dominance, d= Margalef 
community diversity index or species richness, e = Evenness index (Odum, 1971), SR= Surma 
River, KR= Khushyara River, TR= Titas River, GR= Gomti River, RR= Ratna River, B.Baria = 
Brahmonbaria, H. ganj = Habiganj, M.bazar = Maulvibazar) 
 
In respect of pond habitat, B. bengalensis f. typical was higest (20.93/ m2), in summer and lowest 
(0.88/ m2) in monsoon, the same pond of Brahmanbaria District.    
 
 
 515 
 
Table 3 Physico-chemical parameters of ponds during the study period (2005-2007) 
 
Name of the Ponds Temperature transparency pH DO TH 
 B.baria 28.53.25 41.333.29 8.150.31 8.070.12 62.53.75 
Comilla 28.53.88 34.834.12 8.830.27 8.190.22 67.660.66 
Habiganj 28.333.5 36.52.92 8.10.25 7.80.1 53.55.34 
M.bazar 27.53.05 34.672.97 8.400.5 7.610.51 62.002.08 
Sylhet 29.333.19 43.334.33 8.430.06 8.280.31 63.332.84 
Table 4 Physico-chemical parameters of rivers during the study period (2005-2007) 
Name of the Rivers Temperature transparency pH DO TH 
Surma 26.333.49 34.331.77 8.330.10 8.060.15 79.835.29 
Khusyra 27.413.47 44.672.31 8.310.11 8.130.26 80.53.40 
Ratnaj 26.413.97 42.173.09 7.951.15 7.40.28 44.834.86 
Titas 27.253.22 39.674.06 8.50.07 8.210.17 522.88 
Gomoti 28.333.79 35.912.39 8.420.06 8.260.14 65.52.29 
Table 5 Pearson’s correlation among population density of mollusc species and soil parameters of 
rivers. 
1. 
PD 1 
pH 0.670 1 
OM 0.395 -.362 1 
Ca 0.327 -.472 0.852 1 
Mg 0.563 -.230 .958(*) 0.922 1 
N -0.595 -.491 -0.420 0.053 -0.336 1 
P -0.691 -.879 0.032 0.371 0.009 0.844 1 
Cu -0.123 -.768 0.595 0.879 0.636 0.479 0.769 1 
Fe -
.984(*) 
-
0.740 -0.347 -0.198 -0.483 0.709 0.804 0.272 1 
Mn -0.572 0.227 -0.914 -.952(*) 
-
.990(**) 0.231 
-
0.068 
-
0.690 0.472 1 
Zn -0.939 -.712 -0.394 -.148 -0.478 0.831 0.861 0.338 .981(*) .441 1 
 
 516 
 
* Correlation is significant at the 0.05 level (2-tailed). 
** Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed). 
 
The table 5 revealed that population density was positively correlated with soil pH, , OM, Ca, and 
Mg but negatively correlated with Fe, P, Cu, Mn and Zn. pH was positively correlated with 
population density and Mn but negatively correlated with OM, Ca, Mg, N, P, Cu and Fe, OM was 
positively correlated with population density, soil OM, Ca , Mg (P0.05), P, and Cu but 
negatively correlated with pH, N,  Fe , Mn and Zn. Ca was positively correlated with population 
density, pH, OM, Mg, N and Cu but negatively correlated with pH, Fe, Mn (P0.05) and Zn. 
Mg was positively correlated with population density, soil OM (P<0.05), Ca, P and Cu but 
negatively correlated with pH, N, P, Fe, Mn (P0.05) and Zn. N is positively correlated with 
population density, Ca, Mg, P, Cu, Fe , Mn  but negatively correlated with population density, 
pH, OM, and Mg.  
   P was positively correlated with OM, Ca, Mg, N, Cu, Fe, and Zn but negatively correlated with 
population density, pH, and Mg. Cu was positively correlated with OM, Ca, Mg, N, P, Fe and Zn 
but negatively correlated with population density, pH, K and N. Fe was positively correlated with 
N, P, Cu, Mn and Zn (P<0.05) but negatively correlated with population density, pH, OM, Ca, 
and Mg. Mn is positively correlated with pH, N, Fe, P, Fe and Zn but negatively correlated with 
population density, OM, Ca(P<0.05) and Mg (P<0.05). Zn is positively correlated with N, P, Cu, 
Fe (P<0.05) and Mn but negatively correlated with population density, pH, OM, Ca and Mg. 
   Pearson’s correlation among pond mollusc population density and soil parameter of ponds are 
presented in the table 6. Population density was positively correlated with soil pH, OM, Ca, N, Fe 
and Zn (P<0.05) but negatively correlated with K, and Cu. pH was positively correlated with 
Population density, soil OM, K, Cu and Fe but negatively correlated with Mg, N and P. Mn and 
Zn OM was positively correlated with population density, K, Mg, N, P, Fe and Zn but negatively 
correlated with Ca, Cu and Mn. 
   K was positively correlated with soil pH, OM, Cu and Zn but negatively correlated with 
Population density, Ca, Mg , N, P, Fe and Mn. Ca was positively correlated with Population 
density, soil pH, Fe and Mn (P<0.05) but negatively correlated with OM, Mg, N,P, Cu and Zn. 
Mg was positively correlated with Population density, OM, N P<0.01) P and Zn. Mn and Zn but 
negatively correlated with pH, Ca, Cu , Fe and Mn. N was positively correlated with Population 
density, OM, Mg (P<0.05),P and Zn but negatively correlated with pH, K, Ca, Cu, Fe and Mn. P 
was positively correlated with soil OM, Mg and N but negatively correlated with Population 
density, pH ,K, Ca, Cu, Fe, Mn and Zn. Cu was positively correlated with soil pH, and K but 
negatively correlated with Population density, OM, Ca, Mg, N, P and Zn. Fe was positively 
correlated with Population density, soil pH Ca, Cu , Mn and Zn but negatively correlated with K, 
Mg, N and Cu. Mn was positively correlated with Population density , pH, Ca (P<0.01) and Fe 
but negatively correlated with OM, K, Mg, N, P, Cu and Zn. Lastly Zn was positively correlated 
with Population density, soil OM, pH, Mg and N but negatively correlated with Ca, P and Cu . 
   The northeastern region of Bangladesh is naturally reach zone. The climate conditions of this 
region is characterized by moderately high temperature, heavy rainfall and often excessive 
humidity which indicate that this region of Bangladesh provides good habitat for molluscan 
species.  
 517 
 
Table 6 Pearson correlations among population density of mollusc species and soil parameters of 
pond during the study period. 
PD 1 
pH 0.875 1 
OM 0.549 0.441 1 
K -0.013 0.420 0.268 1 
Ca 0.331 0.205 -0.569 -0.521 1 
Mg 0.009 -0.238 0.586 -0.282 -0.576 1 
N 0.041 -0.182 0.629 -0.217 -0.609 .997(**) 1 
P -0.231 -0.615 0.286 -0.624 -0.335 0.824 0.784 1 
Cu -0.462 0.010 -0.149 0.873 -0.484 -0.352 -0.310 -0.557 1 
    Fe 0.828 0.653 0.018 -0.366 0.798 -0.278 -0.279 -0.291 -0.623 1 
Mn 0.209 0.003 -0.548 -0.620 0.944(*) -0.549 -0.596 -0.153 -0.561 0.685 1 
Zn .896(*) 0.864 0.822 0.305 -o.113 0.201 0.254 -0.174 -0.188 0.495 -.222 1
* Correlation is significant at the 0.05 level (2-tailed). 
** Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed). 
The relationships of population densities and physico-chemical parameters of river and pond 
water are presented in table 6, 7 & 8 respectively. 
Table 7 Correlations between population density and physico-chemical parameters of rivers 
during study period. 
 
 
PD 1 
Tem. 0.516 1 
Trans. -0.690 0.130 1 
pH  0.275 0.438 -0.111 1 
DO/mg/l 
 
0.353 0.328 0.224 0.287 1 
TH 0.438 0.080 -0.145 0.493 0.868 1
 
Pearson correlations with physico-chemical parameter of pond water and population density 
revealed that population density was positively correlation with water temperature, transparency, 
pH, DO, and total hardness. Population density was significantly correlated with temperature 
(P<0.05). Freshwater molluscs population density was correlated with physioco-chemical 
parameters of river water viz., temperature, water transparency, pH, DO and total hardness (TH). 
Among population density and river water and physico-chemical parameters of river water 
revealed that population density was positively correlated with water temperature, pH, DO and 
total hardness (TH) and negatively with transparency.   
 
 518 
 
Table 8 Correlations between population density and Physico-chemical parameters of 
ponds during study period 
 
P. D 1 
Temp. 0.495 1 
Trans. 0.819 0.662 1 
pH 0.207 -0.469 0.120 1 
DO 0.328 -0.020 0.522 -0.044 1 
Total hardness 0.385 -0.256 0.390 0.959(**) 0.122 1 
** Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed). 
 
Pearson correlations with physico-chemical parameter of pond water and population density 
reveled that population density was positively correlation with water temperature, transparency, 
pH, DO and total hardness, population density was significant correlation with temperature 
(Table 8).  
 
4. Discussion 
 
Raut (1989) stated that the development of Lymnaea  leutola was highly influenced by pH of 
water and even beyond the range of 6.0-9.5 eggs of the snail did not hatch. Saha (1998) 
calculated mean value of pH of water of the ponds studied ranged between 6.83 to 8.48.The 
calculated mean value of pH of water of the pond and rivers during present investigation reveals 
that pH range 8.1± 0.25 to 8.43±0.27 and 7.95 ±1.15 to 8.42 ± 0.06 respectively (Table 7 & 8) 
which is very favorable for the propagation of snail fauna. The number of snail species tended to 
decrease with a decrease in pH. The drop in species number was particularly noticeable at about 
pH 6.0 and no species occurred in lakes Norway with pH below 5.2. Total hardness, pH, macro 
vegetation in the water and substratum showed a high correlation with snail fauna and were 
considered as primary factor of direct importance to the snails (Qkland, 1983). Clenaghan et al., 
(1998) showed a positive correlation between gastropod density and magnesium   concentration 
as well as pH. They also found a positive correlation between gastropod density and conductivity 
and calcium concentration. Present finding is consistent with investigation of Clenaghan et al., 
(1998). This conclusion confirmed an investigation by Hermann et al., (1993), who noticed a 
rapid decrease in the number of gastropod if the pH value decreased to 5.5. Lewin (2006) 
investigated that the population of Viviparus viviparus decrease if the pH value decreased.  
   Dissolved oxygen seems to play a role in gastropod density. Collier et al., (1998) suggested that 
gastropod density is positively correlated with dissolved oxygen. Lewin (2006) showed a positive 
correlation between gastropod density and Dissolved oxygen. The result of our survey is 
consistent with these authors. 
   Hossain (2002) investigated that hardness of water of Altadighi ranged 30.6 to 99 mg/l with on 
average of 56.2 16.0 and 59.110.6 mg/l from below surface and bottom water respectively. 
Islam et al., (1979) suggested that pond water having hardness of 15 mg/l or above is satisfactory 
for growth of fish. They further added that the acceptable limit of total hardness (as CaCo3) is 200 
mg/l, which can be used for drinking purposes on the basis of above classification the water of 
the studied Ponds (53.55.34 to 67.660.66 mg/) and Rivers (44.83 4.86 to 80.57.81mg/l) 
respectively  is moderately hard (Table 7 and 8). This favours the mollusc species to propagate 
effectively. 
 519 
 
Qkland (1983) the decline in species number corresponds with decreasing value of the total 
hardness and pH. The present study revealed that population density of mollusk is positively 
correlated with pH and Total hardness of river water (Table 6a).  
   Alam et al., (1999) Studied the diversity of the macro zoo benthos of five zones  of intertidal 
area of Halishahar coast, Chittagong, Bangladesh. In sample mean of 1990 and 1991 Shannon-
Wiener diversity index (H) were 1.636±0.071, 3.131±0.067, 3.376 ± 0.071, 2.697±0.055, and 
1.569±0.082 in the zones 1,2,3,4 and 5 respectively. In the sample mean of 1990 and 1991 
species evenness (J) were 0.615±0.048, 0.805±0.004, 0.841 ±0.004 0.741±0.008 and 0.591±0.012 
in the zones 1,2,3,4 and 5 respectively. Khan et al., (1996) worked on Community structure and 
ecology of macro benthic invertebrates fauna of Lake Kaptai, Bangladesh. They measured 
Community structure at four depths of two stations. The diversity value (H) ranged between 2.3 
and 3.4 at margin to 7 m. depths and between 1.4 and 2.6 in the profundal zone and evenness 
ranged 0.64 to 0.73 at margin to 7 m. depths and between 0.47 and 0.63 in the profundal zone.  
   Diversity indices (H') (2.20, 2.30 and 1.93), Simpson indices of Dominance (C) (0.14, 0.16 and 
0.14), evenness (e) (0.88, 0.79 and 0.81) were obtained from the collected samples from River Ratna, 
Kushiyara and Surma respectively. Values and trends of the obtained indices from the present 
investigation are more or less similar with that of macrobenthic community of Lake Kaptai, 
Bangladesh as reported by Khan et al., (1996). In case of river habitats the minimum index of 
dominance (c=0.13), species richness (d=2.14), evenness (e=0.65) and minimum index of 
diversity (H'=1.62) were estimated from the collected samples of river Ratna, Titas and, Gomti 
respectively. Again maximum index of dominance (c=0.26), species richness (d=3.49) and 
maximum index of diversity (H'=2.30), and evenness (e=0.88) were estimated from the collected 
samples of river Gomti, Khushyara and Ratna respectively. In case of river habitats the minimum 
index of dominance (c=0.13), species richness (d=2.14), evenness (e=0.65) and minimum index 
of diversity (H'=1.62) were estimated from the collected samples of river Ratna, Titas and, Gomti 
respectively. Again maximum index of dominance (c=0.26), species richness (d=3.49) and 
maximum index of diversity (H'=2.30), and evenness (e=0.88) were estimated from the collected 
samples of river Gomti, Khushyara and Ratna respectively. 
   Lower index of dominance (ranged from 0.13 to 0.23) and higher evenness index (ranged from 
0.77 to 0.88) with higher diversity index (ranged from 1.62 to 2.30) indicates the cohabitation of 
maximum number of species with moderate population densities in river (Lotic) habitat. This is 
evident showing the number of species recorded in each river (8-16) and population densities (3. 
26 to 11.93/ m2). Higher value of evenness (e) explains the co-habitation of maximum number of 
existence of species in the community of the locality. On the contrary, the higher value of index 
of dominance indicates that species paucity prevails in the habitats. Maximum numbers of 
species in the community intensify the competition for the environmental requisite. 
Consequently, more species diversity pull down the population density in the locality concerns. 
On the other hand, the presence of minimum number of species in a specific area inspires 
increased population densities through facilitating the availability of environmental requisite 
resources (Pramanik, 1992). These findings are more or less similar to that of Pramanik's opinion. 
Evenness and diversity indicates behave inversely to the index of dominance but pond in 
Maulvibazar showed that community index (c) was not inversely related to evenness. It was 
contradictory to Odum’s  (1971) proposition. Due to time and inadequate logistic support it may 
be that accurate sampling was not done up to the mark of satisfaction. Nevertheless, it deserve 
further intensive study to clarify the situation arose in the present study. However, it might be 
pointed out that evenness or equitability notes the distribution of individuals among the species 
present in the community uniformly or not. This distribution might be restricted due to prevailing 
 520 
 
environmental exposed. Finally, it might be concluded that the favorable weather, physico-
chemial parameter of soil and water, and vegetation of Bangladesh are comfortably harbouring 
suitable number of mollusc species. 
 
5. Conclusion 
 
Mollusc have both economic and ecological importance. Its play a vital and pivotal role in 
ecosystem functioning in both aquatic and terrestrial systems. Mollusc are also significant agents 
in maintaining ecosystem balance by playing the role of nature’s cleanser in the water kingdom 
and thereby maintaining water quality. This natural resources have been depleting quiet 
alarmingly in the most recent past, as there has been no regulation imposed with regard to 
harvesting of snail. The present study revealed that most of the mollusc are providing the 
economic subservience are under the extreme threat. Accordingly, the animal needs careful 
scientific management for their existence to serve the human beings.  
 
Acknowledgment 
 
The authors indebted acknowledge Dr.S.K. Raut, Professor, Department of Zoology, University 
of Calcutta, India, for providing some relevant journals and cordial help in identifying several 
species. They  also grateful to Dr. A. Dey and Mr. Barua, Zoological Society of India, Kolkata 
for their assistance and identifying some molluscs species. 
 
References 
 
Alam, M. S. and Patra, W. R. (1986). A Preliminary study on the freshwater molluscan fauna of 
Chittagong division with notes on their ecology. Proc.  Fifth  nat. zoo. Conf. Bangladesh, pp 
99-110.  
Alam, M. S., Islam, M. A. and Ali, M. S. (1999). Studies on Diversity in the Intertidal 
Macrozoobenthos of Halishar Coast, Chittagonj,  Bangladesh. Bangladesh J. Zool., 27(1): 
17-23. 
Clenaghan, C., Giller, P. S., Halloran,  J.O. and Hernan, R. (1998). Stream macroinvertivrate 
communities in a conifer-afforested catchment in Ireland relationship to physico-chemical 
and biotic factors. Freshwater Bioology,40:175-193. 
Collier, K. J., Willcock, R. J. and Meredith, A.S. (1998). Influence of substrate type and physico-
chemical conditions on macro invertebrates faunas and biotic indices of some low land 
Waikato, Newzealand streams, Journal of Marine and Freshwater Research, 32:1-19. 
Hermann,  J. E.,  Degarman, A., Gerhardt, C., Johansson, P. E., and Muniz, I.P. (1993). Acid- 
stress effects on stream biology. Ambio, 22(5): 298-307.  
Hossain, A.H. (2002). Production System Productivity and Its Augmentation in the Altadighi 
Dhamairhat in the District of Naogaon. Ph.D. Thesis. University of Rajshahi.  
Islam, A.K.M.N. and Chowdhury, A.R. 1979. Hydrobiological studies of Dhanmondi lake. Dacca 
II. Phytoplankton. J. Asiatic Doc. Bangladesh. 5 (2): 47-57. 
Jahan, M.S., Mannan, M.A. and Mandal, K N. (1990). Intertidal Molluscs of Sundarbans, 
Bangladesh. Environment and Ecology, 8(2): 603-607. 
Jahan, M.S. (1993). Some terrestrial and freshwater gastropods of Bangladesh with their 
ecological notes. Univ. J. Zool. Rajshahi University, 12: 65-71. 
Jahan, M.S., Islam. G.M.J. and Rahman, M.R. (1998). Molluscan Biodiveristy of Sundarbans, 
Bangladesh. Proceeding of the National Seminar on Coastal Environment and Energy 
Resources in Bangladesh, December 08-09, organized by: Environmental science 
Discipline, Khulna University, Bangladesh, pp 35-44. 
 521 
 
Jahan, M.S. and Rahman, M.R. (2000). Biodiversity, of the Aquatic habitats of Rajshahi. 
Metropolition city. J. Natl,. Bot. Soc.,  54: 87-98. 
Khan, M.A.G., Chowdhury, S.H. and Paul, J.C. (1996). Community structure and ecology of 
macrobenthic invertebrate fauna of Lake Kaptai, Bangladesh. Tropical Ecology, 37(2): 229-
245. 
Lewin, N. (2006).The Gastropod communities in the lowland rivers of agriculture areas-their 
biodiversity and bioindicative value in the Ciechanowska upland, Central Poland. 
Malcologia, 49(1):7-23. 
Michael,  P. (1990). Ecological methods for field and laboratory investigations (2nd reprint). New 
Delhi: Tata McGraw-hill Publishing Company Ltd., p. 55-172. 
Mitra, S.C., Dey, A. and Ramakrishna, (2005). Land and Freshwater Molluscs, Fauna of Andhra 
Pradesh state fauna Series 5, Parts 5 Zool. Surv. India, pp175-253.  
Nelson, D. W. and Sommers, L. E. 1982. Total carbon, Organic carbon and organic matter. In 
page,  A. L. Miller, R. H. & Keeney, D. R. (1989). Methods of soil analysis (Part 2) (2nd ed.) 
Madi., Wis. USA: Soc. Agron. Inc., pp53 
Odum, E.P.  (1971).  Fundamentals of Ecology. W.B. Saunders Company,Philadelphia, London 
and Toronto. 
Olsen, S. R. and Sommers, 1982. Phosphorus. In Page, A. L., Miller, R. H., & Keeney, D. R. 
(1989). Methods of soil analysis (Part-20 (2nd ed.) (pp 403-427). Madi., Wis., USA: Amer. 
Soc. Agron., Inc. 
Page, A.L., Miller, R.H. and Keeney, D.R. (1989). Methods of soil analysis (Part 2) (2nd ed.) 
Madi., Wis. USA: Soc. Agron. Inc., pp539-580. 
Peterson. L. 2002. Analysis of soil, water and plant material, Soil Resources Development 
Institute, Dhaka. 
Piper, C. S. 1950. Soil and Plant analysis. Australia. Adelaid Univ.  Hassel  Press.  
Pramanik, M. N. (2001). Earthworm biodiversity of North-Western Regions of Bangladesh with 
notes on vermicomosting potentialities. Ph. D. thesis, University of Rajshahi. 
Qkland, J. (1979).  Distribution of Environmental factors and Freshwater Snails (Gastropoda) in 
Norway: use of European Invertebrates Surveys Principals, Malacologia, 18: 211-222. 
Rahman, M.A., Hossain, M.M., Islam, M.A. and Mostafa, M.G. (2003). Species composition, 
abundance and composition of freshwater molluscs in a pond, Bangladesh J. Zool. 31(2): 
149-153. 
Raut. S.K. (1989). Laboratory rearing of medically and economically important molluscs. In: 
Snail, Flukes and Man. Zool. Surv. India, Calcutta, pp. 81-88. 
Saha, B.K. (1998).  Ecology and Bio-economics of the Freshwater Edible snails of Bangladesh. 
Ph. D. Thesis, University of Rajshahi , Rajshahi, Bangladesh, 162 pp. 
Seddon, M.B.,I.,  Killen., B. and Bogan, A.E. (1998). Developing strategy for molluscan 
conservation in the next century. Journal of Chonchology special Publication, 2:295-298. 
Subba Rao, N. V. (1989). Hand book of freshwater Molluscs of India, Zoological survey of India, 
Calcutta. 290 pp. 
Subba Rao, N.V. and Mitra, S.C. (1989). Systematic and ecology of fresh water gastropods of 
parasitological importance In: Snail, Flukes and Man, Zool. Surv. India, pp. 47-63. 
Sukla R.S., and Chandel, P.S. (2002). Plant ecology and soil science. New Delhi: Chand and 
Company Ltd., pp. 125-140. 
Walkey and Black, I. A., 1934. An examination method for determining soil organic matter and a 
proposed modification of chromic and titration method. Soil Sci., 37: 29-38. 
Wilson, E.O. (1988). The current state of biodiversity, pp3-18, in E. O. Wilson, ed., Biodiversity, 
National Academy Press, Washington DC.538 pp. 
 
 
 522 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
INTERFERENCE ON ECOSYSTEM AND ITS IMPACT ON SURROUNDING 
TERRESTRIAL ENVIRONMENT: A CASE OF BURIGANGA RIVER AND ADJACENT 
AREAS  
 
 
Fatema Meher khan1 
 
 
ABATRSCT: Dhaka city has grown by the bank of Buriganaga. The history, culture and heritage of 
the city have been largely shaped by this river. But the river has been continuously abused by 
unsupervised industrialization and unplanned urbanization. The environment of Buriganga and 
surrounding has gradually been destroyed by water and soil pollution due to the discharge of 
industrial and municipal waste into the river. Moreover, there is a tendency to occupy the natural 
resource-Buriganga river in the name of development and causing its destruction. As a result there is 
an ecological imbalance which is not only destroying the aquatic life but in turn has significant 
impact on surrounding terrestrial environment. Although the present government has taken steps for 
dredging Buriganga river but yet to manage the disposal of solid and domestic wastes into river body. 
However effective steps need for the preservation of environment and public interventions needs to 
be made to stop further dumping of waste into Buriganga and to stop the river side encroachment. 
Therefore Buriganga river and its surroundings is a good example for the study to know the emerging 
problems and threats, the river is now facing and to investigate the ways to mitigate the problem. The 
area of Buriganga river between bridge no.2 and Bangladesh-China friendship Bridge has been 
identified as field survey area for the study. The main objectives of the paper are to comprehend the 
existing state of problems along Buriganga, the reasons for the interference on the ecosystem of the 
area and its impact over the surrounding terrestrial environment. The possible outcome will be the 
ways to mitigate the existing problem and to identify the ways to save the river from pollution.   
Key words- Ecosystem, Buriganga river, pollution, interference.  
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
In the present condition of globalization, cities have experienced environmental changes due to  
                                               
1 Lecturer, Department of Architecture, BUET, Dhaka, Bangladesh, Mobile: 01741393520,   
   fmkhan@arch.buet.ac.bd,   fatema_meher_khan@yahoo.com, fatema.meher.khan@gmail.com 
 
 
 
 523 
population, transportation and industrial uprising. Dhaka city is one, where the tendency is to 
accommodate the growing needs of the city without preserving the natural resources. Growing 
human populations and development consume millions of acres of ecologically important natural 
resources to make way for urban development. Buriganga river has enormous significance to the 
residents of Dhaka city. For thousands of years the river does not only surround two sides of the city, 
but also had been used for navigation, settlement, recreation, sanitation, flood control and as a source 
of food and water. According to officials an average of 30,000 people use the Sadarghat launch 
terminal, one of the largest river ports in the world, for departure and arrival every day (Daily Star, 
April 03, 2009).  But this vital river has become extremely polluted and is close to biological death 
for several reasons. As aquatic habitats of Buriganga river have been destroyed bit by bit, countless 
creatures and plants disappear. Thus the interaction between the living and non-living portions of the 
environment have damaged which have a negative impact on the surrounding terrestrial environment 
also. Moreover the balance between the natural resource and surrounding development has broken 
down.  
 
1.1. Objectives  
 
Study of the environmental changes is a common interest for the researches and academicians. 
Several studies have been conducted about the ecological condition and the pollutants of Buriganga 
River. Along with this it is also essential to identify the sources of pollutions, their locations around 
the river and the impact of pollution in order to overcome the existing problem. Considering the 
issues the objective of the paper is to understand the existing scenario along Buriganga and the 
reasons for the interference on the ecosystem of the area. The paper also aims to comprehend the 
impact of the interference on the river ecosystem over the surrounding terrestrial environment.  
       
1.2.  Methodology 
 
Firstly, Detail physical survey was undertaken to understand the physical realities of the environment 
and to know the reasons for the change in the ecosystem of Buriganga river. The area between bridge 
no. 2 and Bangladesh-China friendship bridge was identified for detail physical survey as the area 
was thought to be responsible for the pollution and bringing changes in the river ecosystem. In the 
second stage, available relevant literature is reviewed. Although very few materials and information 
regarding Buriganga is found from the literature. Lastly, informal discussion with the experts of 
related field has been done to know the technical issues related to the study. 
 
 
2. River Ecosystem 
 
Before proceeding on to the existing scenario of Buriganga river and the reasons for the pollution, it 
is necessary to understand the basics of aquatic ecosystem at the initial stage. An aquatic ecosystem 
specifically refers to the dynamic interaction of all parts of the environment focusing particularly on 
the exchange of materials between the living and non-living portions in an aqueous milieu. A river is 
a part of aquatic ecosystem-defined by the plants and animals that live on its bank as well as the 
aquatic life found in the water itself. The major components of a river ecosystem include producers 
 
 
 524 
(plants, phytoplankton), consumers (zooplankton, fish etc), and decomposers (bacteria, fungi etc). 
Their interaction with abiotic components (penetration of light, soil, water, dissolved nutrient 
concentrations, suspended solids, etc) form an aquatic ecosystem. The producers supply O2 to aquatic 
systems through photosynthesis. This O2 is then used by the producers, consumers and decomposers. 
The concentration of dissolved O2 highly depends on amount of pollutants because most water 
pollutants are responsible for low oxygen levels in freshwater. These pollutants make it difficult for 
species to live, and many aquatic organisms, especially fish die when dissolved oxygen levels fall 
below 5 ppm. Every stages of aquatic ecosystem are closely related and dependent to each other. The 
whole aquatic community can survive only if every single part of it survives. Fish play a key role in 
recycling nutrients and in complex flood plain food web. But during lean season, the Buriganga river 
turns deadly for fish and sub aquatic organisms. Thus if fish vanishes from the ecosystem of 
Buriganga, it will affect the stability of whole aquatic ecosystem of area. Again dissolved oxygen in 
waters is primarily derived through the photosynthesis of primary producers. But due to water 
pollution in Buriganga river it is difficult for plants and algae to survive. So if primary producer can’t 
survive, the total cycle of aquatic ecosystem will not work. Although there are a few natural sources 
of pollutants present in aquatic ecosystems. But mostly, freshwater ecosystems may become 
unbalanced by factors due to human activities. Ecological imbalance in Buriganga river is being 
caused continuously due to discharge of industrial wastes into water body. Since all portions of a 
river are part of the same ecosystem, when it is altered, the river and its wildlife and plants are 
affected throughout its length. 
 
 
3. Present Scenario of the Study Area 
 
In the following clause the present scenario of Buriganga river is briefly highlighted in terms of its 
poor water condition, lack of water treatment facilities, expansion of industrial and commercial 
activities along the bank, loopholes of Governments administrative activities to give a overview of 
the present situation. 
   Poor water condition- Buriganga river carries only wastewater during the seven months 
(November-May) of the dry season and the water level used to decrease to an alarming level during 
the dry season (Daily Star, April 03, 2009). Even during the wet season aquatic animal can not 
survive in the dead river water because the water quality of the Buriganga river has been seriously 
affected by the interference of dumping of municipal waste, solid, liquid, and chemical waste, 
organic waste from the surrounding markets and toxic industrial discharges from industries on its 
banks, especially from tanneries of the Hazaribagh (Alam, K and Marinova, D). According to several 
studies, each day about 900 cubic metres untreated domestic and industrial effluents are discharged 
into the Buriganga-Turag system. Again when solid waste and effluents run into river, the Biological 
Oxygen Demand (BOD) in the water rises, which is tragic for the sub aqueous life. Among others, 
effluents of tannery factories lower the Dissolved Oxygen (DO) content of the river water below the 
critical level. Apart from high levels of Biological Oxygen Demand (BOD), other water quality 
parameters like ammonia, heavy metals such as aluminum, cadmium, lead, and mercury, sulphate, 
chloride etc have also been detected in the water of Buriganga river (Daily Star, April 03,2009). 
Moreover, due of the water pollution, the whole area is full of offensive odors of toxic chemicals. As 
a result the bio-diversity of Buriganga river is affecting badly which may cause the death of flora, 
 
 
 525 
fauna of river and its surroundings. The present Government has taken initiative to improve the water 
quality and enhance the flow of water of Buriganga river under  "The Buriganga River Restoration 
Project” by supplying fresh waters from River Jamuna. The main objective of the project is to raise 
the level of dissolved oxygen (DO) to 4 micrograms per litre from almost zero in dry season now 
(Daily Star, August 08, 2011). 
   Lack of water treatment facilities- Dhaka WASA has only one sewage treatment plant at Pagla 
with a capacity of 0.12 million cubic metres per day, which is only 10 percent of total disposal of 
sewage. But, due to mismanagement the treatment plant is using one third of its capacity (Daily Star, 
April 03,2009). Again sewerage of Dhaka city is mostly untreated and dumped into the river as the 
Dhaka Water Supply and Sewerage Authority (WASA) has not enough waste treatment facilities. 
WASA dumps sewage just a little away from its own intake plant. WASA covers only 30 percent of 
the city with sewerage network and treatment plant can treat only 20 percent of the sludge. Khawaja 
M Minnatullah, a World Bank environment specialist, said that water in the rivers around Dhaka is 
so polluted today that the Syedabad water treatment plant has virtually become a wastewater 
treatment installation (Daily Star, April 03,2009). The capacity of water treatment plant is too small 
against the need. This is not putting any significant impact for treating the waste water of the river. 
   Expansion of industrial and commercial activities along the river bank- Surrounding areas of 
Buriganga is one of multiple business areas with better accessibility and the river became an ideal 
site for expansion of industrial activities due to ease of transportation. So many unauthorized shops 
have encroached on both sides of river. An hour downstream from the capital city the Buriganga 
river is still crystal clear but as it flows through the capital, waste from sewers, factories pour into it 
(Institute for Environment and Development Studies, 2003). Due to interference on river ecosystem 
by encroachment, unplanned urbanization and establishment of industries which pollute the river, 
water pollution has taken such a devastating state. Expansion of industrial activities on Buriganga 
have caused a big threat to river because these are narrowing the river and disrupting its normal flow. 
Thus, the shape and character of water bodies is changing which affecting bio-diversity of the river. 
   Loopholes of Governments administrative activities-  Bangladesh Water Act 2008, enacted by the 
Government, prohibits encroaching of water bodies and terms it as a punishable act. Unfortunately, 
the authorities seem unwilling to enforce the law powerfully. About three to four locations along the 
bank are still being filled up between two bridges. Again the Government over the years has allowed 
industrialists to pollute the river to such an extent that surface water turned pitch black in Buriganga. 
Moreover, most of the industries do not have any treatment facility for wastewaters. Treatment plants 
possessed by a few industries, do not operate regularly. Again, Environment Conservation Rules of 
1997 provide for prerequisite of EIA only for 'Red' category industries (highest polluters) but they do 
not have any detailed guidelines on how to carry it out. It does not mention 'Orange' category 
industries that are also potentially hazardous to environment (Daily Star, June 15,2009). Moreover 
Government has also planned to move the surrounding ternaries to Savar but yet to start the shifting. 
Such loopholes of Government’s legal and administrative activities, the encroachments and dumping 
of wastes into the river can’t be stopped which is destroying the ecosystem of the river.  
   Components of healthy aquatic ecosystem are (a) morphology (shape and character of water 
bodies), (b) water quantity ( size of the waterbody), (c) water quality ( flow of water), (d) flora (bank-
side and aquatic plants) and (e) fauna (aquatic animals) (www.scotland.gov.uk). But Buriganga river 
is losing the above mentioned components in the present condition. From the discussion the 
conceptual diagram of Buriganga river ecosystem can be drawn which differs from ideal condition. 
 
 
 526 
   
   
 
 
 
4. Reasons for the Interference on Eco-system  
 
Several spots on both sides of the river between Buriganga river bridge-2 and Bangladesh-China 
friendship bridge are selected responsible for the river pollution. These spots are surveyed (fig-03 
and 04) to know about the intensity and degree of interference on the ecosystem and their reasons. It 
is observed that interference is mainly done by human being in two ways-either by encroachment or 
by throwing and dumping of wastes into the river bed. Encroachment is done by illegal structures, by 
storage of materials and parking, by dumping of organic waste and waste from dying industries along 
the river bank. In case of throwing and dumping of wastes in the river, sources of wastes can be 
divided into industrial waste/ effluents, municipal, domestic solid and sewerage waste, waste from 
ships and terminal, heavy metal pollution, waste from brick field, sedimentation, fertilizer and 
clinical waste and wastes from Shashan ghat etc. Buriganga river pollution has also done by the 
washing and bathing activities of the local people. The areas under study are also affected by soil 
pollution as the polluted water penetrates into the surrounding land area. 
   Encroachment - Encroachment has always been a big threat to rivers. Politically backed 
influentials, locals, sand traders, etc have encroached the Buriganga river bank and illegal structures 
including houses, bazars, ghats, brick fields etc (fig 05) has created obstacles on the flow of the river. 
BIWTA itself have constructed market on riverbank (fig. 03.1). In a recent visit to Sadarghat, 
encroachment was seen on the Buriganaga continues on both sides of the BIWTA office (Daily Star, 
May 30,2009). In the southern part of river many multistoried building owners have encroached the 
river side by constructing plaza ( fig.04.5) as the extension of their illegal structures.  
   Encroachment by storage of materials and parking- The river bank is presently using as the 
parking space for the rickshaws and vans used in the adjacent markets (fig.06). In several points near 
Kathuria- on the southern side of Buriganga, many wooden and bamboo depots can be seen, where 
the owners used to store their materials along the river bank causes environmental pollution. The 
rotten bark, sap wood, dry or wet rotting fungi, beetle termite marine barers, insects etc causes the 
water pollution (Kulkarni, G.V,  1968).  
   Encroachment by dumping of organic waste and waste from dying industries along the river 
bank- Local vegetable grocers have long been dumping rubbish, rotten vegetables and fruits, and 
coconut shells on riverbank in Shyambazar and Badamtali area (fig.07) around the BIWTA office,  
Figure 01. Ecosystem of a river Ideal case Figure 02. Conceptual diagram of the ecosystem of Buriganga 
                  river 
 
 
 527 
                       Fi
gu
re
-0
3.
  M
ap
 o
f B
ur
ig
an
ga
 sh
ow
in
g 
th
e 
ar
ea
s r
es
po
ns
ib
le
 fo
r w
at
er
 p
ol
lu
tio
n 
 in
 th
e 
no
rth
er
n 
si
de
. 
Fi
g 
03
.1
  
B
IW
TA
 
its
el
f 
en
cr
oa
ch
in
g 
th
e 
riv
er
 
ba
nk
 
by
 
co
ns
tru
ct
in
g 
m
ar
ke
ts
 
Fi
g 
03
.2
  
M
an
y 
ill
eg
al
 
m
ul
tis
to
rie
d 
m
os
qu
es
 
an
d 
m
ad
ra
sa
s 
ha
ve
 
er
ec
te
d 
al
on
g 
th
e 
riv
er
ba
nk
 
Fi
g 
03
.3
  
Se
rie
s 
of
 
te
m
po
ra
ry
 
st
ru
ct
ur
es
 a
lo
ng
 th
e 
riv
er
 
ba
nk
 
ar
e 
bl
oc
ki
ng
 
th
e 
vi
ew
 
as
 
w
el
l 
as
 
en
cr
oa
ch
in
g 
th
e 
riv
er
 
ba
nk
 
Fi
g 
03
.4
  
La
rg
es
t 
sl
ui
ce
 
ga
te
 
at
 
Su
tra
pu
r 
al
on
g 
th
e 
no
rth
er
n 
si
de
 o
f t
he
 ri
ve
r 
th
ro
ug
h 
w
hi
ch
 
al
l 
th
e 
w
as
ta
ge
 
of
 
th
e 
ar
ea
s 
m
ix
es
 w
ith
 th
e 
riv
er
 
Fi
g 
03
.5
 
M
an
y 
ill
eg
al
 
m
ul
tis
to
rie
d 
m
os
qu
e 
an
d 
m
ad
ra
sa
s 
ar
e 
co
ns
tru
ct
in
g 
al
on
g 
th
e 
ba
nk
 
Fi
g 
03
.6
 
Fi
g 
03
.7
  
En
cr
oa
ch
er
s 
ar
e 
fil
lin
g 
up
 
th
e 
riv
er
 
ba
nk
 
by
 
sa
nd
 fo
r s
ev
er
al
 p
ro
je
ct
s 
Fi
g 
03
.8
 
W
as
te
s 
fr
om
 th
e 
ne
ar
by
 
sh
ip
ya
rd
 a
re
 d
is
ch
ar
ge
d 
in
 th
e 
riv
er
 
Fi
g 
03
.9
 
W
as
te
s 
fr
om
 t
he
 n
ea
rb
y 
Sh
as
ha
n 
G
ha
t 
ar
e 
al
so
 
di
sc
ha
rg
ed
 in
 to
 th
e 
riv
er
 
 
 
 528 
               
Fi
gu
re
-0
4.
  M
ap
 o
f B
ur
ig
an
ga
 sh
ow
in
g 
th
e 
ar
ea
s r
es
po
ns
ib
le
 fo
r w
at
er
 p
ol
lu
tio
n 
 in
 th
e 
so
ut
he
rn
 si
de
 
 
Fi
g 
04
.1
  
En
cr
oa
ch
er
s 
ar
e 
fil
lin
g 
up
 
th
e 
riv
er
 
ba
nk
 
by
 
sa
nd
 
fo
r 
ne
w
 
co
ns
tru
ct
io
n 
 
Fi
g 
04
.2
 
En
cr
oa
ch
m
en
t 
ar
e 
do
ne
 
by
 s
ev
er
al
 w
oo
de
n 
de
po
ts 
al
on
g 
th
e 
riv
er
 w
he
re
 t
he
 
w
oo
d 
ar
e 
us
ua
lly
 
ke
pt
 
al
on
g 
th
e 
riv
er
 b
an
k 
 
Fi
g 
04
.3
 
Fi
g 
04
.4
  
Th
is
 l
ar
ge
 a
re
a 
is
 u
si
ng
 
fo
r d
um
pi
ng
 w
as
ta
ge
  
Fi
g 
04
.5
 
Ill
eg
al
 
la
nd
 
oc
cu
pi
er
s 
ha
ve
 b
ui
lt 
a 
la
rg
e 
pl
az
a 
in
 
fr
on
t o
f t
he
 b
ui
ld
in
g,
 th
us
 
en
cr
oa
ch
in
g 
th
e 
riv
er
 
ba
nk
 
Fi
g 
04
.6
 
La
rg
es
t 
kh
al
 
na
m
ed
 
K
al
ig
an
j 
al
on
g 
so
ut
he
rn
 
si
de
 o
f 
th
e 
riv
er
 t
hr
ou
gh
 
w
hi
ch
 a
ll 
th
e 
w
as
ta
ge
 o
f 
su
rr
ou
nd
in
g 
ar
ea
s 
m
ix
es
 
w
ith
 th
e 
riv
er
 
 F
ig
 0
4.
7 
 
Fi
g 
04
.8
 
W
at
er
 p
ol
lu
tio
n 
is
 a
ls
o 
ca
us
ed
 b
y 
th
e 
w
as
ta
ge
 
of
 b
ric
k 
ya
rd
 a
lo
ng
 t
he
 
riv
er
 b
an
k 
 
 
 529 
                         
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                   
 
                         
                                                                                           
 
contributing to pollution and filling up of the Buriganga. Dyeing units and small industries at these 
areas are discharging untreated washing and chemical wastes along river bank (fig.08). Although 
concerned authority have already been warned by giving notice not to throw any wastes in the area, 
but people of the area are not bothered and using the river bank as the dumping ground (fig.04.4).  
   Industrial waste/ effluents- Violating the Environment Conservation Rule 1997, many industries 
such as jute, cotton, rolling, textiles, metals, chemicals, cement, leather, paperboards, fertilizer, etc 
industries of Postoagola, Faridabad , Shyampur, Char-Kaligang, Char Mirer bag, Gandaria areas are 
discharging untreated industrial effluents in the rivers. Industry often uses water for cooling 
processes, sometimes discharging large quantities of warm water back into the river. Raising the 
temperature of the water lowers the level of dissolved oxygen and upsets balance of life in the water. 
   Municipal, domestic-solid and sewerage waste- Municipal wastes of the adjacent areas and most 
of the human excreta directly goes down the rivers through underground pipelines as most of the 
houses in surrounded areas are not connected to excrete treatment plant. Each day a huge volume of 
domestic solid waste from surrounding areas are also discharging into Buriganga river. Surface water 
pollution occurs mainly by human sewerage coupled with municipal garbage and industrial effluents.  
   Waste from ships and terminal- Buriganga have now become crowded with commercial ships, and  
Figure 05. Series of illegal structures encroaching  river bank    Figure 06. River bank is using as the parking  
                  place of  vans             
Figure 07. Encroachment of river bank by organic waste Figure 08. Wastes from dying industries are  
                  dumping along the bank of the river 
 
 
 530 
fishing boats, all of which are causing problems for wildlife. The small shipyards are discharging 
untreated washing wastes, plastic bottles, containers, discarded plastic materials, burnt oil etc into 
river. Again launch terminals are discharging human wastage and burnt oil, lubricant etc in the river, 
which causes serious water pollution.  
   Heavy metal pollution –From ship breaking industry near Postogola a large quantity of heavy 
metal is discharging into Buriganga river which tend to increase concentration of chemical in a 
biological organism in time. The entire aquatic animal communities can be badly affected by these 
pollutants. 
   Waste from brick field- Another main reason for water pollution in Buriganga is wastes from brick 
kilns. Wastes from the brick field are discharging in the water which causes serious water pollution.  
   Sedimentation- When rain runs off the land it picks up dirt, silt and carries them into river water. 
When dirt and silt settle in the water body, these sediments can keep sunlight from reaching to the 
aquatic plants. It harms the photosynthesis process and thus effect the river eco-system.  
   Fertilizer- When large amount of fertilizer from surrounding areas drain into the river, 
concentration of nitrate and phosphate into the water increases. Algae used these substances to grow 
and rapidly turn the river green. This massive growth of algae leads to pollution.  
   Clinical waste and wastes from Shashan ghat- A large amount of clinical wastes from Mitford 
and other hospitals around and wastes from Postagola Shashan ghat are discharged into the river 
which causes serious water pollution.  
         
        Lessons from Case Studies 
        Findings of the case studies are summarized in the following table. 
Table. 1  Showing the types of wastes are dumping in the Buriganga river by different activities and 
                 type of pollution it results  
 
Description of 
activities 
     Type of Waste                     Basic Ingredients/   
                         Pollutants 
  Results of   
   Pollution 
Dumping and 
storing of woods 
along river bank. 
Organic and degradable 
waste 
Tanin, resins, gum, latex, calcium oxide and 
deposits of silica. (Kulkarni, G.V, 1968) 
Water and soil 
pollution. 
Dumping and 
throwing of waste 
from kacha bazar. 
 Organic and degradable 
waste 
 
Waste of biological origin such as paper, 
cardboard, food, green waste, fruits, sludges 
etc. 
Water and soil 
pollution. 
Dumping and 
throwing of waste 
from textile and 
dying industries.  
Liquid / solid - hazardous 
chemical waste 
(Moniruzzaman, 2002) 
SS (suspended solids), pH, oil and grease, 
total dissolved solids, Ammonia, Sulfides, 
Nitrate, Phosphate, Phenols, Chromium, 
copper etc. (Moniruzzaman, 2002)  
Water and soil 
pollution. 
Industrial waste 
and effluents 
Liquid and hazardous 
chemical waste 
(Moniruzzaman, 2002) 
SS (suspended solids), Nitrates, Chlorides, 
Chromium, Sulfide, Lead etc. 
(Moniruzzaman, 2002) 
Water pollution 
Municipal, 
domestic waste. 
Organic / Solid, degradable 
/ non- degradable waste 
Household waste, construction and 
demolition debris, sanitation residue, and 
waste from streets, products packed in cans, 
aluminium foils, plastics, polythene and 
Water and soil 
pollution. 
 
 
 531 
other such non- biodegradable items.  
Sewerage waste Hazardous Inorganic-
chemical waste 
Nitrate, Phosphate, SS (suspended solids), 
Coliform etc. (Moniruzzaman, 2002) 
Water and soil 
pollution. 
Heavy metal waste 
from ship breaking 
yards and 
industrial effluents. 
Hazardous Inorganic-
chemical waste 
Iron, Zinc, Copper, Manganese, Cadmium, 
Cobalt, Nickel, Cromium, Lead, Dioxin etc. 
(Moniruzzaman, 2002) 
Water and soil 
pollution 
Waste from ships 
and terminals 
Gaseous pollutant and 
inorganic chemical waste. 
(www.physorg.com) 
Sulfur dioxide, Burnt Oil, Lubricant, 
Hydrocarbon.(www.physorg.com) 
Water pollution 
Waste from 
agricultural lands 
Organic / Inorganic-
chemical waste 
Ammonia, Nitrate, Phosphate, Potassium,  
Potash, Calcium,  Magnesium, etc. 
Water and soil 
pollution. 
Clinical waste Soiled waste, disposables, 
anatomical waste, chemical 
wastes etc. 
Disposable syringes, Swabs, Bandages, 
Body fluids, Human excreta, 
Water and soil 
pollution 
 
 
5. Impact of the Changed Ecosystem on the Surrounding Terrestrial Environment 
   
To understand the impact of changed ecosystem, it is necessary to know about the quality of water 
and soil which are responsible for the change.  
   Water quality-In case of water, oxygen is the most well-established indicator of river water quality 
(Moniruzzaman, 2002). The physio-chemical parameters for river water quality are- PH, Dissolved 
Oxygen (DO), Biological Oxygen Demand (BOD), Salinity etc. And chemical parameters for water 
quality are- Chloride, Sulphate and Nitrates of Ammonia, Potassium, Magnesium, Nitrogen, 
Phosphorus, etc. According to experts pollution-free water contains six to seven milligram Dissolved 
oxygen and the level must not fall lower than 4.0 milligram. But in some parts of Buriganga river, 
level of Dissolved oxygen was found to be near zero. SM Mahbubur Rahman, specialist and Head of 
Water Resource Planning Division of IWM, pointed out very low levels of Dissolved oxygen along 
the Buriganga river which in the present situation indicates the poor quality of water. The water of 
Buriganga river is relatively safe during wet season (August-min 5.00 to max 6.58, October- min 
5.02 to max 6.57) but in dry season (February-min 2.20 to max 3.38, April-min 2.20 to max 3.88) it 
is not within the safe limit for drinking purpose, fisheries, irrigation etc. Thus the Dissolved Oxygen 
(DO) concentration of water of Buriganga indicated an unfavorable environment for aquatic lives 
during dry season (Moniruzzaman, 2002). Usually organic wastes reduce DO during decomposition.  
   Soil quality- Water and soil pollution of an area is interrelated to each other. The polluted water 
when penetrated through surrounding soil of river, then soil also gets polluted. Since it is closely 
linked to water pollution, many effects of soil contamination appear to be similar to the ones caused 
by water contamination. Moreover, as all the vegetations and trees have grown up from polluted soil, 
food chain can be damaged. And ultimately if any animal ingest vegetations, fruit from the tree, then 
animal can be affected by pollutants. Again dumping of wastes along the river bank can pollute soil.  
   In order to find out the level of water pollution in Buriganga river and the impact, a comparison of 
different parameters between standard limits and existing condition of water and the impact of their 
variations on environment- human life, aquatic life and surrounding plants and animals are shown in  
the following table. Here the impact on soil will be the same 
 
 
 532 
 
 
 
 533 
 
(S
ou
rc
e-
 D
oE
 a
nd
 M
un
iru
zz
am
an
, 2
00
2 
an
d 
in
fo
rm
al
 d
is
cu
ss
io
n 
w
ith
 P
ro
f. 
D
r. 
N
ilu
fa
r N
ah
ar
, D
ep
t o
f C
he
m
is
try
, D
ha
ka
 U
ni
ve
rs
ity
 
   
   
   
   
  A
re
as
-S
ad
ar
gh
at
, S
ut
ra
pu
r, 
Zi
nz
ira
, e
tc
) 
 
 
 
 534 
It can be stated from the above comparison that most of the parameters varies highly from the 
standard to existing condition which are affecting the entire aquatic life of Buriganga river. Along 
with the above impact, other impact on Buriganga river and surrounding due to encroachment, 
sedimentation, bathing, washing activities and cutting of riverside trees are given in following table.  
  
Table 3  Environmental issues: Sources of pollution and their impact on environment 
 
Environm-
ental issue 
 Sources of 
pollutions 
                        Impact on environment 
Water Encroachment of 
river bank 
Affects the water flow of the river which is important for bio-diversity 
and for agriculture and fisheries of the adjacent areas.  
Water and 
soil 
Encroachment 
by organic 
wastes and dying 
industries along 
the river 
The water of Buriganga river is highly contaminated with E.Coli bacteria 
due to high amount of decayed fruits, vegetables and other bio-
degradable organic wastes dumped into the river (Moniruzzaman, 2002) 
and it is not safe for drinking purposes, fisheries and other uses Bacteria 
decompose organics material which cause decrease of oxygen contents 
in water results the suffocation of fish and other aquatic organisms. 
Water Sedimentation The sediments keep sunlight from reaching to aquatic plants that grow in 
water. It harms the photosynthesis process, which obstruct the aquatic 
plants to make food. 
Water Bathing and 
washing into the 
river 
Bathing and washing into river cause several skin problems. The mixing 
of soap in the water through bathing and washing is another reason for 
environmental pollution. It destroys the edible quality of water. 
Water and 
soil 
Clinical waste 
and waste from 
Shashan ghat 
Suspended particles of clinical waste and waste from Shashan ghat can 
reduce amount of sunlight penetrating the water, disrupting the growth of 
photosynthetic plants and micro-organisms. This has subsequent effects 
on rest of aquatic community that depend on these organisms to survive. 
Water 
 
Cutting of trees 
along river 
Cutting of trees along the river results the rise of water temperature that 
affects the local climate and kills fish eggs and other wildlife. 
 
 
        6. Possible actions to mitigate the problem 
 
Several actions can be adapted to mitigate the environmental pollution problem of Buriganga. 
Polluted water and waste treatment plant should be used to tackle the problem of waste disposal into 
the river. Saidabad Water Treatment Plant can be expanded and the water supply distribution 
network should be improved as a way of tackling the problem. Another way to mitigate the water 
pollution is the water recycling process to keep the water clean. In terms of industrial effluents 
industries in the “Orange” and “Red” categories are required to renew their Environmental Clearance 
Certificates (ECC) annually. The Ministry of Industries has taken the initiatives to shift the tanneries 
from Hazaribagh to Hemayetpur, Savar with Common Effluent Treatment Plant (CETP) facilities to 
save the rivers, which is appreciable. But along with the waste treatment or water recycling facilities 
it is also necessary to remove the encroachments and land filling on both sides of river bank to 
maintain the free flow of the river. The water flow of Buriganga river have decreased which resulted 
 
 
 535 
dirt and silt settle in the water body, pollution affects water, excess chemicals contaminates water etc. 
According to several study report there is no alternative but increasing the flow of the river. One 
solution could be to augment the rivers of Dhaka with freshwater from the Jamuna river (Daily Star, 
April 03,2009). Implementation of the project will improve water quality significantly. This 
additional flow in Buriganga river system will improve the dissolved oxygen level of 4 milligrams 
per litre, which is quite satisfactory for the survival of aquatic animals. In order to improve the water 
quality of Buriganga, the wastes that stored in river bed should be removed. One way to remove 
wastes that stored in ground level of river is dredging which has already started. After execution of 
the project, the only thing that should be strictly maintained is that the water of the river system does 
not get contaminated by domestic and industrial wastes and disposal of solids into the river water. 
 
         7. Recommendation and conclusion 
 
Recently the government has taken a holistic approach to save the rivers surrounding Dhaka, after a 
massive campaign “save rivers, save Dhaka” initiated by the civil society, human rights 
organizations, environmentalists and mass media. About thirteen agencies are related to different 
development programmes along Buriganga, so due to the complexities in the administrative works no 
one takes full responsibility of a particular action and thus chaos occurs. Although all the rules and 
regulations are there but those were not implemented because the works of all related authorities are 
not coordinated properly and local people don’t understand the adverse impact of throwing waste 
into the river. Following are some important points that can be identified to save the river from 
pollution   
 Dhaka City Corporation (DCC) and BIWTA may work together in order to control disposal of 
solid wastes into river.  
 Proper drainage facilities should be installed to improve the domestic sewage system.  
 WASA should install more treatment plants besides using the total capacity of the sewage 
treatment plant at Pagla to avoid the discharging of sewage into the river water in the future.  
 Department of Environment and other Government agencies should ensure that the industrial 
zones will follow Environment Conservation Act 1997 in order to control the discharge of 
untreated industrial effluents. The installation of effluent treatment plants must be made 
compulsory for every industries-large and small. 
 BIWTA should take effective actions so that the owners of the vessels and traders on the bank of 
the river dump the solid wastes at the fixed places provided by DCC.  
 RAJUK, Dhaka City Corporation and the other pourashavas authority should ensure that people 
use septic tank systems due to absence of sanitary sewer system. The Government agencies 
should provide proper facilities for routine sludging of the septic tanks.  
 The Government should recover and excavate encroached land and turn those into parts of rivers.  
 Regular monitoring of river water quality may be done to control river pollution. 
   The government and related agencies should identify the actual tribulations at first and should 
propose effective strategies and policies according to that to make a sustainable solution. And people 
should come forward to force the Government to save the Buriganga and other rivers around. 
Otherwise, Dhaka city will be unlivable in near future. 
         
 
 
 536 
Reference 
 
Alam, Khorshed and Marinova, Dora, Sustainability and River Restoration, p.03.  
Daily Star, April 03, 2009 
Daily Star, May 30, 2009 
Daily Star, June 15, 2009  
Daily Star, August 08,2011 
Institute for Environment and Development Studies (2003). Aquatic Ecology and Dangerous  
        Substances: Bangladesh Perspective, Diffuse Pollution Conference Dublin 2003, pp. 8-66. 
Kulkarni, G.V. (1968). A Textbook of Engineering Materials, Ahmedabad Book Depot,    
        Ahmedabad, pp.240. 
Katyal, Timy and Satake, M (1998).  Environmental Pollution,  Anmol Publications Pvt. New    
        Delhi.  
Moniruzzaman, Mohammad, Spatial Distribution of Pollutants in Buriganga River, M.S. thesis,    
        Department of Soil, Water and Environment, University of Dhaka, Dhaka, 2002, pp.64-110. 
www.scotland.gov.uk, August 10, 2009. 
www.physorg.com, July 27, 2009. 
www.atsdr.cdc.gov, July 15, 2009. 
www.ecs.co.sz, August 19, 2009. 
 
 
 
537 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
  
 
DETERMINATION OF PLANT NUTRIENTS AND ORGANIC MATTER CONTENT IN 
TEXTILE SLUDGE 
 
 
Taslima Zaman1, Md. Mostafizur Rahman1, Abdul Kadir Ibne Kamal1, Md. Delwar Hossain 
Molla2 Rashadur Rahman1 and Md. Khabir Uddin1* 
 
 
ABSTRACT: Textile industry is one of the most important and rapidly developing industrial 
sectors in Bangladesh. It has a high environmental impact, since it consumes considerably high 
amounts of processed water and produces a large amount of polluted discharge water and sludge. 
The present research was carried out to determine the content of essential macronutrients (N, P, K 
and S) as well as micronutrient (B) and total organic matter in textile sludge of a composite 
Textiles Mill, and assess its possibility to use as a soil conditioner or fertilizer in agricultural 
land. Kjeldhal method, UV-visible spectrophotometer, and Flame photometry, were used to 
determine N, P, S, and K respectively. The results revealed that plant macronutrients Nitrogen 
(N) and Phosphorous (P) were found in significant amount compared to some commonly used 
organic manures, where as Potassium (K) and Sulphur (S) content were relatively low. The 
ranges of macronutrients are 8.18, 0.60, 0.06 and 0.00013 % for N, P, K and S, respectively. 
Boron (B), the plant micronutrient has a percentage of 0.00013% which is optimum for organic 
fertilizer. Moreover; total organic matter was abundantly available in sludge and the amount was 
13.6 %. The studied sludge has optimum pH ranging from 6.2-6.5. In addition, thermal study 
explored that after remaining at 120 °C for eight hours the sludge was thermally stable. The dried 
sludge samples showed significant presence of water at room temperature and while the samples 
was heated up to 120 °C. The average moisture content in the raw sludge was about 80 %. 
Therefore, textile sludge can be able to supply small but significant amount of important nutrients 
to soil and it can be able improve soil structure, and it will be a potential organic fertilizer. 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
The pollution of natural waters with textile effluents has become a serious problem in 
Bangladesh, as industrial growth and development have been on a very large scale. It is also 
reported that textile and dyeing factories in the world pose a major environmental threat because 
of the large amounts of water and dyes involved in the manufacturing process (Abd El-Rahim et 
al., 2008; Ranganathan et al., 2007). Environmental pollution caused by textile wastewater 
results in adverse effects on flora, fauna and the general health of the residents of surrounding 
                                                        
1 Department of Environmental Sciences, Jahangirnagar University, Dhaka-1342, Bangladesh 
2 Principal Scientific Officer, Soil Resources Development Institute (SRDI) 
538 
 
industrial area. While agriculture for domestic consumption is Bangladesh’s largest employment 
sector, the money gained from exporting textiles is the single greatest source of economic growth 
in Bangladesh. The textile sector plays a leading role in the economy of Bangladesh, and now 
accounts for some 40% of the total manufacturing, and about 50% of the industrial workforce. 
The textile industry uses vegetable fibres such as cotton, animal fibres such as wool and silk, and 
a wide range of synthetic materials such as nylon, polyester, and acrylics. Usually the textile 
effluents contain highly toxic dyes, salts, acids, alkalis and bleaching agents. Heavy metals like 
cadmium, copper, zinc, chromium and iron are also found in the dye effluents and sludge 
(Mathur et al., 2005). Determination of toxic contaminants in sludge is essential as it provides 
information on the actual risk relating to the presence of the contaminants; their potential 
degradation or accumulation by organisms and plants as well as their migration deeper into the 
soil profile (Oleszczuk, 2008; Marian et al., 2005). 
   Although characteristics of sludge depend on the wastewater treatment process and sludge 
stabilization methods, it is rich in organic compounds and plant nutrients (Hua et al., 2008; 
Teixeira et al., 2007). Plant nutrients such as nitrogen, phosphorus and organic material are very 
abundant in sludge which could be regard as soil improvers and replace conventional fertilizer in 
agricultural production (Luostarinen et al., 2008; Gupta and Garg, 2008; Casado-Vela et al., 
2006). 
   The present study investigated the possibility to use sludge in agricultural land as a fertilizer 
since it can improve the physical, chemical and biological properties of soils which may enhance 
crop growth. In addition, the use of sludge as a fertilizer would decrease the amounts of chemical 
fertilizers needed in agriculture and sludge use in agriculture could help to save non-renewable 
materials or energy, a pre-requisite to achieve sustainable production. 
 
2. Materials and Methods 
 
The sludge samples were collected from Halimur Rahman (H.R.) Textiles Mills Ltd., which is 
located at Kornapara at  Savar upazilla in Bangladesh and the GPS location is 230 49' 31" N and 
900 15' 27.72" E. The samples were collected from the industry`s different sludge treatment 
plants from 5th to 9th July, 2011. Collected sludge samples were dried in an oven at about 120 °C 
for 8 h and then the samples were ground by grinding motor and again dried till constant weight 
was obtained. Then the samples were carefully labeled and kept for analysis. The pH and 
moisture content of raw sludge are measured by soil pH meter. Raw sludge direct solution pH is 
measured by Hanna pH meter. Determination of Nitrogen was carried out by Kjeldahl method. 
For Total Organic Matter (TOM), oxidation with potassium dichromate method was followed. By 
flame photometry method, potassium was determined at wavelength 766 and 769 mÎ¼ (Walsh, 
1971). Phosphorus test was performed by the Vanadomolybdophosphoric Yellow Color 
Method in Nitric Acid System (Walsh, 1971) and the absorbance was taken at wavelength of 
470 nm. For sulfur, digested sample (10 mL) was taken in the measuring flask followed by 10 
mL of acid seed solution and 5 ml turbidimetric reagent using pipettes. Then shaking was 
performed frequently for 20 minutes and measured the absorbance on a spectrophotometer at 535 
nm. For each determination, same experiment was also done for standard solutions and blank 
tests were also done by using blank digest. With these values, each calibration curve was 
constructed against known concentrations. The concentrations of K, P and S were found from the 
graphs by putting the absorbance of these samples. 
539 
 
3. Results & Discussion 
 
Reuse of industrial waste (sludge) as fertilizer is increasing because of recycling requirements set 
on organic wastes. Now a days landfilling is becoming more expensive and industrial companies 
consequently have to look for cheaper ways of disposing their wastes. ( Araújo et al. 2005) 
Before reusing any solid waste or sludge it is needed to characterize it to know its physical and 
chemical properties in the raw stage. 
 
3.1. Characterization of raw sludge after sampling and Organic fertilizer standard in 
Bangladesh 
 
3.1.1. Physical Characteristics 
 
Table 1 Physical Characteristics of studied sludge 
Parameter Condition Standard Condition (Source: 
Waste Concern compost 
standard) 
Physical condition Non Granular form Non Granular form 
Color Dark gray to black Dark gray to black 
Odor Odor present Absence of foul odor 
Moisture Content Around 80 % Maximum 15 % 
 
3.1.2. Chemical characteristics 
Table 2 Chemical characteristics of studied sludge 
Parameters 
                       
 
Sample-
1 
Sample-
2 
 
Sample-
3 
 
Sample-
4 
Average 
value % 
Standard 
Range( Source: 
Waste Concern 
compost 
standard) 
pH 6.4 6.5 6.4 6.2 6.4 6.0 – 8.5 
Organic Matter % 14.5 13.2 12.0 14.7 13.6 10 – 25  
Total Nitrogen (N ) % 8.9 7.6 8.3 7.9 8.18 0.5 – 4.0  
540 
 
Total Phosphorus (P) % 0.57 0.63 0.59 0.56 0.60 0.5 – 1.5  
Potassium (K) % 0.07 0.09 0.07 0.05 0.06 1.0 – 3.0  
Sulphur (S) % 0.0014 0.0012 0.0010 0.0015 0.0013 0.1 – 0.5 
Boron (B) % .00014 .00015 .00010 .00012 0.00013                 -- 
 
3.1.2.1. pH 
 
The degree of soil acidity or alkalinity, expressed as soil pH, is a master variable that affects a 
wide range of soil properties-chemical, biological, and, indirectly, even physical. The chemical 
variable greatly influences the availability of root uptake of many elements, including both 
nutrients and toxins. The activity of soil microorganisms is also affected. (Brady, 2002). In more 
alkaline conditions they are less available, and symptoms of nutrient deficiency may result, 
including thin plant stems, yellowing (chlorosis) or mottling of leaves, and slow or stunted 
growth. pH levels also affect the complex interactions among soil chemicals. Phosphorus (P) for 
example requires a pH between 6.0 and 7.5 and becomes chemically immobile outside this range, 
forming insoluble compounds with iron (Fe) and aluminum (Al) in acid soils and with calcium 
(Ca) in calcareous soils. A pH level of around 6.3-6.8 is also the optimum range preferred by 
most soil bacteria, although fungi, moulds, an anaerobic bacteria have a broader tolerance and 
tend to multiply at lower pH values. (Wikipedia, 2010). 
 
 
                                 
 
 
 
 
                 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Graphical representation of measured pH in four different samples 
 
The measured pH (average) of the studied sludge is 6.4. According to ministry of agriculture the 
standards of pH in organic fertilizer must remain 6.0-8.5. So, it can be said that the raw sludge 
has an optimum pH. 
 
3.1.2.2. Moisture 
Soil moisture is the amount of water present in the soil surrounding the roots on a continual basis; 
not right after a heavy rain or a spring snow melt, but rather on a day-to-day, month-to-month 
541 
 
average. It varies greatly due to soil type, amount of organic matter present, exposure to sunlight 
and temperature. The plant uses soil moisture as a means of transporting necessary minerals into 
and throughout its vascular system. Water is critical for photosynthesis, the plant's food-making 
process. Moisture affects seed germination. Some seeds require moisture to help break down their 
seed coat so germination can occur; morning glory seeds must be soaked in water for 24 hours 
prior to planting. Others require moisture for survival immediately following germination, such 
as the spores of a fern. (www.azcentral.com). 
 
 
Figure 2: Graphical representation of measured moisture in four different samples 
 
According to ministry of agriculture the maximum range of moisture content in organic fertilizer 
should be 15%. The average moisture content in raw textile sludge is 80 %. The moisture content 
will decrease if it is dried or composted. 
 
3.1.2.3. Organic Matter 
Organic matter is a complex and varied mixture of organic substances. It provides much of the 
carbon exchange and water holding capacities of surface soils. Certain components of soil 
organic matter are largely responsible for the formation and stabilization of soil aggregates. Soil 
organic matter also contains large quantities of plant nutrients and act as a slow release nutrient 
storehouse, especially for nitrogen. 
   Furthermore, organic matter supplies energy and body building constituents for most of the 
microorganism. For all this reasons, the quality and quantity of organic matter is a central factor 
in determining fertilizer quality. (Brady, 2002)  
   According to ministry of agriculture the maximum range of organic matter in organic fertilizer 
should be 10-25%.The average Organic matter in raw textile sludge is 13.6%. The amount is  
 
                               
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3: Graphical representation of measured Organic matter in four different samples 
542 
 
 
optimum in contrast with the organic fertilizer standard. So, the use of this raw sludge is 
reasonable to use as organic fertilizer in terms of organic matter. 
 
3.1.2.4. Total Nitrogen (N) 
 
Nitrogen is an integral component of many essential plant compounds. A good supply of nitrogen 
stimulates root growth and development, as well as the uptake of other nutrients. Plant responds 
quickly to increased availability of nitrogen, their leaves turning deep green in color. Nitrogen 
increases the plumpness of cereal grains, the protein content o both seeds and foliage. It can 
dramatically stimulate plant productivity. Plants deficit in nitrogen tend to have a pale yellowish 
green color (chlorosis), have a stunted appearance, and develop thin, spindly stems. In nitrogen 
deficit plants, the protein content is low and the sugar content is high. Nitrogen deficit plants 
often have a low shoot-to-root ratio, and they mature more quickly than healthy plants. The 
negative effects of nitrogen deficiency on plant size and vigor are often dramatic. (Brady, 2002). 
The approximate optimum values of total nitrogen in soil are 0.271-0.360%. (Islam, M. S., 2009) 
for agricultural use nitrogen containing organic fertilizer and NPK fertilizer has to apply in 
agricultural field. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4: Graphical representation of amount of total nitrogen (N) in four different samples 
 
According to ministry of agriculture the standards of Nitrogen concentration in organic fertilizer 
must remain 0.5-4.0 % (Waste Concern compost standard). The average concentration of 
nitrogen in raw sludge is 8.18% and the value is complying with the standard value of organic 
fertilizer. The nitrogen content is relatively high compared to other elements. The experimental 
results of sludge analysis indicate very high concentration of total nitrogen due to use of azo dye 
in production process. So, it can be conclude that the raw sludge can fulfill the requirement of 
nitrogen if it is used as raw material of organic fertilizer. A typical NPK fertilizer has a 
composition of 8% N, 8% P and 8% K. (Sommers, 1977) . Figure 3.5 it is clear that the raw 
textile sludge is also ready for covering the requirement of nitrogen content for inorganic NPK 
fertilizer. 
543 
 
 
3.1.2.5. Total Phosphorus (P) 
Next to nitrogen, phosphorus has more widespread influence on both natural and agricultural 
ecosystems than any other essential element. Adequate phosphorus nutrition enhances many 
aspects of plant physiology, including the fundamental processes of photosynthesis, nitrogen 
fixation, flowering, fruiting and maturation. Root growth, particularly development of lateral 
rootlets, is encouraged by phosphorus. A phosphorus-deficient plant is usually stunted, thin-
stemmed, and spindly, but its foliage often dark, almost bluish, green. In severe cases, 
phosphorus deficiency can cause yellowing and senescence of leaves. Some plants are stunted 
and develop purple colors in their leaves. (Brady, 2002).So, it is essential to add phosphorus 
required by the plants in soil by applying phosphorus rich fertilizers.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5: Graphical representation of amount of total phosphorus (P) in four different samples 
 
   According to ministry of agriculture the standard range of phosphorus concentration in organic 
fertilizer is 0.50-1.50%. The average concentration of phosphorus in studied sludge is 0.60%.The 
amount is optimum. Moreover, the results were nearly similar to the phosphorous content of 
some organic manure as shown in Table 3. 
   So, the studied sludge can be allowed to use as raw material of organic fertilizer by considering 
the status of phosphorus content in it. The raw sludge may be used in phosphorus deficit soil for 
amendment of the soil. Before that it is needed to analyze the heavy metals in the sludge. But be  
Table 3: Organic manure and their nutrient composition (%) (BARC, 1997) 
Name of organic manure N P K 
Cow dung 0.5-1.5 0.4-0.8 0.50-1.9 
Poultry manures 1.6 1.5 0.85 
Farmyard manure 0.5-1.5 0.4-0.8 0.50-1.9 
Compost (General) 0.4-0.8 0.3-0.6 0.70-1.0 
544 
 
 
the content of phosphorus will increase if it is dried or composted and it will be a good raw 
material for organic fertilizer. 
 
3.1.2.6. Potassium (K) 
Potassium (K) is an essential nutrient for plant growth. Because large amounts are absorbed from 
the root zone in the production of most agronomic crops, it is classified as a macronutrient. The 
exact function of K in plant growth has not been clearly defined. Potassium is associated with 
movement of water, nutrients, and carbohydrates in plant tissue. If K is deficient or not supplied 
in adequate amounts, growth is stunted and yields are reduced (Olson et al., 1987). According to 
ministry of agriculture the standards range of potassium in organic fertilizer is 1.0-3.0 %. The 
average concentration of potassium in raw studied sludge is 0.06%. The content of potassium is 
very low compared to the standard. The result shows variation in case of potassium content of 
some organic manure as shown in Table 3. However, commonly used chemical fertilizers like 
Triple super phosphate (20%), super phosphate (8%) and diammonium phosphate (20%) contain 
high concentration of phosphorus. Similarly, muriate of potash (50%), potassium sulphate (42%) 
contained high concentration of potassium (Islam et al. 2009). 
 
 
 
 
 
          
Figure 6: Graphical representation of amount of potassium (P) in four different samples 
 
So it is not viable to use the sludge as organic fertilizer in order to fulfill the potassium 
requirement in soil. Furthermore the potassium content will increase if the sludge is composted 
and then it will be a good raw material for organic fertilizer. 
 
3.1.2.7. Boron (B) 
The critical level of available boron in soil is 0.2 ppm or .00002%. However, Studies showed that 
sterility problems in wheat, chickpea and mustard grown on sandy soils can be significantly 
improved by the application of boron. Wheat yield after boron treatment can be increased by 
more than 50%.  Yields of vegetables like cauliflower, cabbage, broccoli and tomato are 
documented to be found to increase (14-52%) due to B fertilization. (Islam, M. S.,  2009). 
 
545 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7: Graphical representation of amount of boron (b) in four different samples 
 
In the studied textile sludge the boron content is 0.00013% and the amount is approximately 
equal to the critical level of soil. So, no extra benefit can be found in case of boron if the sludge is 
used as organic fertilizer. It should also be noted that maximum crop consume boron as 
micronutrient for their normal growth and the optimum requirement is nearly 0.0g/decimal. 
(SRDI, 2010) 
 
3.1.2.8. Sulfur (S) 
Sulfur shares some important characteristics as essential plant nutrients. It is found primarily in 
organic forms in soil, moves in soil and plants mostly in the anionic form.  
   Healthy plant foliage generally contains 0.15 to 0.45% sulfur, or approximately one-tenth as 
much sulfur as nitrogen. Sulphur has long been recognized as indispensable for many reactions in 
living cells. Plants deficient in sulfur tend to become spindly and develop thin stems and petioles. 
Their growth is slow, may be delayed. (Brady, 2002). The use of high analysis fertilizers such as 
urea, triple super phosphate, muriate of potash and diammonium phosphate, and limited 
application of organic manure have all contributed to the intensification of the S deficiency 
problem in soils. (Islam, M. S., 2009) 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8: Graphical representation of amount of sulfur (S) in four different samples 
 
546 
 
According to ministry of agriculture the standard range of sulfur concentration in organic 
fertilizer is 0.1-0.5%. The average concentration in raw studied sludge is 0.0013%.The content is 
very low compared to the standard. So if the sludge is used as organic fertilizer it will fail to 
fulfill the Sulfur requirement in soil. Furthermore, the sulfur content will increase if the sludge is 
composted and then it will be a good raw material for organic fertilizer. 
 
References  
 
Abd El-Rahim, Khalil, W.M., W.K.B., and Mariam, G.E., 2008. ‘Genotoxicity studies on the 
removal of a direct textile dye by a fungal strain, in vivo, using micronucleus and RAPD-
PCR techniques on male rats’. J. Applied Toxicol., vol. 28, pp.484-490. 
Araújo, F. S. A., Monteiro, R. T. R., 2005. ‘Plant bioassays to assess toxicity of textile sludge 
compost’. Scientia Agricola, Vol.62. no.3. 
BARC. 2007. ‘Fertilizer Recommendation Guide’. Bangladesh Agricultural Research Council. 
Ministry of Agriculture. Farm Gate, Dhaka-1207, Bangladesh. Soils Pub. No. 45. P. 237. 
Brady, N.C. and Weil, R.R., 2002. ‘The Nature and Properties of Soils’. 13th Edn., Pearson 
Education, Singapore. ISBN 81-7808-625-5 pp 364, 498,543,544,575, 592, 593, 622,623. 
Casado-Vela, Selle, J. S., Navarro, J., Ustamante, M.A. B, Mataix, J., Guerrero, C. and Gomez, 
I., 2006. ‘Evaluation of composted sewage sludge as nutritional source for horticultural 
soils’. Waste Manage. Vol. 26: 946-952. 
Gupta, R. and V.K. Garg, 2008. ‘Stabilization of primary sewage sludge during 
vermicomposting.’ J. Hazardous Mater.,Vol. 153, pp.1023-1030.  
Hua, L., Y. Wang, W. Wu, M.B. McBride and Y. Chen, 2008. Biomass and Cu and Zn uptake of 
two turfgrass species grown in sludge compost-soil mixtures. Water Air Soil Pollut., 188: 
225-234. 
Islam, M.S., 2009. ‘Challenges for Nutrient Management in Bangladesh’., ‘IPI-OUAT-IPN, 
International Simposium on Potassium Role and Benefit in Improving Nutrient Management 
for food Production and Reduced Environmental Damage’, Bhubanaswar, Orissa, India. 
Islam, M. M., Halim, M. A., Islam, S.M.,  Islam,  M. S.,  and Biswas, C. K.,  2009. ‘Analysis the 
Plant Nutrients and Organic Matter in Textile Sludge in Gazipur, Bangladesh’. Journal of 
Environmental Science and Technology, Vol.2, pp. 63-67. 
Luostarinen, S., S. Luste and M. Sillanpää, 2008. Increased biogas production at wastewater 
treatment plants through co-digestion of sewage sludge with grease trap sludge from a meat 
processing plant. Bioresour. Technol., 100: 79-85. 
Marian, T., Teofil ,K. and Jersy, C., 2005. ‘Removal of heavy metals from sewage sludge used as 
soil fertilizer’. Soil Sediment Contaminat. Int. J., Vol.14, pp. 143-154. 
Mathur, N., Bhatnagar, P.,  Nagar, P., and Bijarnia, M.K., 2005. ‘Mutagenicity assessment of 
effluents from textile/dye industries of Sanganer, Jaipur (India): A case study’. Ecotoxicol. 
Environ. Safe .Vol. 61, pp. 105-113. 
Oleszczuk, P., 2008. ‘Application of three methods used for the evaluation of polycyclic aromatic 
hydrocarbons (PAHs) bioaccessibility for sewage sludge composting’. Bioresour. Technol., 
Vol.100, pp 413-420. 
Sommers, L. E., 1977. ‘Chemical Composition of Sewage Sludge and Analysis of their Potential 
Use as Fertilizers’. J. Environ. Qual., Vol. 6, pp. 225. 
547 
 
SRDI, 2010. SRMAF Project, Ministry of Agriculture. Soil Resources Development Institute 
(SRDI), Dhaka.  
Teixeira, S.T., W. José de Melo and É.T. Silva, 2007. ‘Plant nutrients in a degraded soil treated 
with water treatment sludge and cultivated with grasses and leguminous plants’. Soil Biol. 
Biochem., Vol.39,pp.1348-1354. 
Walsh, L.M., 1971. Instrumental Methods for Analysis of Soil and Plant Tissue. 1st Edn., Soil 
Science Society of America, Inc., Wisconsin, USA., ISBN: 3871169994. 
Wikipedia, 2011, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Organic_fertilizer. 
 
 
 
 
548 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
APPRAISAL OF STORED RAINWATER QUALITY FOR DRINKING WATER SUPPLY 
IN THE SOUTHWESTERN COASTAL AREA OF BANGLADESH 
 
 
Sajal Kumar Adhikary1 and Md. Ikramul Haque2 
 
 
ABSTRACT: Rainwater harvesting is a prospective option for drinking water supply to the 
salinity and arsenic affected coastal areas in Bangladesh. In the last few years, various initiatives 
were taken in the country by different government and non-government organizations to install 
and uphold different sorts of rainwater harvesting systems for drinking and household water 
supply. The present study was undertaken to evaluate the quality of stored rainwater from the 
currently practiced various rainwater harvesting systems in Dacope upazila of Khulna district 
located in the southwestern coastal areas of Bangladesh. A total of 24 samples of stored rainwater 
were collected on a monthly basis (March to August) from four different types of storage 
reservoirs (Ferro-cement tank, Motka, Pond) using catchments having different roofing materials 
(Tin shed house, Palm-leave shed house) of various rainwater harvesting options practiced in the 
study area for laboratory investigations. The test results indicated that for all samples, initially the 
stored rainwater contains a slightly higher value of pH and maintain the acceptable range of 
Bangladesh standard for drinking water. The test results also revealed that in all the cases, other 
quality parameters (color, turbidity, salinity, alkalinity, suspended matters, and total dissolved 
solids) in the rainwater were found within the allowable limit of Bangladesh drinking water 
standard. In addition, there were no evidences of bacteriological contamination observed in the 
stored rainwater except pond storage, which implies that there is a low risk of spreading water 
borne diseases from stored rainwater if rainwater stores in a suitable storage tank and maintain 
properly. This research conclusively supports the utilization of rainwater as a viable and 
alternative source of drinking water supply of acceptable quality for the salinity and arsenic 
affected water scarce areas in the southwestern coastal belt of Bangladesh. 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Worldwide, rooftop rainwater harvesting (RWH) is getting increased attention as an alternative 
source of drinking water in the water scarce areas (Meera and Ahammed, 2006). In the recent 
years, rooftop RWH has received greater attention as a potential alternative source of water 
supply both in the coastal and arsenic affected rural areas in Bangladesh (Karim, 2010). This is 
considered as a sustainable source of potable water supply that has less impact on the 
environment and nowadays, rainwater is used as a source for numerous domestic applications 
                                                        
1Assistant Professor, Department of Civil Engineering, Khulna University of Engineering & Technology 
(KUET), Khulna, Bangladesh. sajaladhikary@yahoo.com   
2Assistant Director, Planning and Development Cell, Khulna University of Engineering & Technology    
(KUET), Khulna, Bangladesh. ikram_civil@yahoo.com  
549 
 
like drinking, bathing, laundry, toilet flushing, hot water supply and for gardening purposes 
(Karim, 2010; Pathak and Heijnen, 2006). As a tropical country, Bangladesh receives high 
seasonal rainfall all over its area. Availability of the high seasonal rainfall and suitable roof 
catchments in the rural areas make RWH a potential source of water supply option (Islam et al., 
2010; Karim, 2010; Ahmed, 2002). The annual average rainfall is about 2400 mm and in most 
part of the country, people usually can have the access to rainwater for 6-8 months on an average. 
In the coastal areas of the country, suitable aquifers at shallow depths are rarely available. In 
addition, surface water especially in the river water is highly saline and turbid and the scarcity of 
potable water is very acute in these areas. Rain-feed ponds water and direct collection of 
rainwater are the major sources of drinking water in most parts of the coastal areas. About 28% of 
the country’s total populations live in these areas and supply of safe water is one of the important 
environmental issues for human health and sustainable development in the coastal areas. Rainfall 
in the coastal areas is much higher than the average rainfall and RWH has a good potential to 
supply drinking and cooking water in the coastal areas (Karim, 2010). 
 
 
Figure 1: Spatial distribution of rainfall in Bangladesh 
    
550 
 
Rainwater is available in adequate quantity in Bangladesh. Spatial distribution of long-term 
annual average rainfall all over the country is presented in Figure 1. Relatively higher rainfalls 
occur in the eastern region of the country, while the highest rainfalls occur in noth-eastern region 
and eastern part of the coastal area. However, the lowest rainfall occurs in the western part of the 
country having a value less than 1500 mm per year. In the coastal and hilly areas, where greater 
intensity of potable water supply security problem is observed, have higher rainfall, which makes 
this areas favorable for applying and promoting RWH (Islam et al., 2010). However, the success 
of implementing RWH techniques in an area is related to the effective collection and utilization 
of rainwater in a sustainable way. Although rainwater is available in Bangladesh, but the problem 
is to utilize it as an alternative source of safe drinking water in a sustainable manner for arsenic 
contaminated areas and coastal areas with insufficient safe drinking water. Therefore, the present 
study attempts to appraise the quality of stored rainwater from a selected coastal area (Dacope 
upazilla of Khulna) in Bangladesh for sustainable utilization of rainwater as potable water supply 
in the coastal areas of Bangladesh. 
 
2. Materials and Methods 
 
2.1. Description of Study Area 
 
Dacope upazilla of Khulna district (Figure 2), a coastal region of Bangladesh, has been taken as a 
case study area for the present study. It has an area of 99158 sq. km., which is bounded by 
Batiaghata upazila on the north, Pashur River on the south, Rampal and Mongla upazillas on the 
east, Paikgachha and Koyra upazillas on the west. Main rivers are Pasur, Sibsa, Manki, Bhadra. 
The southern part of this upazila is surrounded by Sundarban. The upazilla is experiencing acute 
potable water supply problems, which is severely affected by the water quality problems 
particularly by salinity. Since the area is located very close to the Say of Bengal, both 
groundwater and surface water contain undesirable level of salinity. Drinking water was an acute 
problem in the area. Normally, people of Dacope use water from pond, canal/ditch, river, tube 
well or rainwater, depending on the availability (Hussain and Ziauddin, 1989).  
   A number of government and non-government initiatives are taken to solve this ever-existing 
problem. Nowadays, RWH is being promoted in this area like many other parts of the country to 
solve this problem in a sustainable way. From the field survey, it is observed that a variety of 
storage tanks such as Ferro-cement tank, Motka (Earthen made tank), and RWH by Pond are used 
for rainwater storing in the study area throughout the year for drinking purposes. According to 
Hussain and Ziauddin, 1989, local people in this area start to store rainwater in September and 
subsequently use this harvested rainwater for about five to eight months before the next monsoon 
begins. In addition, they found that a large number of people in the area have been drinking 
rainwater. People usually drink rainwater in the rainy season. However, in the off-season they 
hardly drink rainwater because of lack of proper storage facilities. Some government and non-
government organizations such as NGO Forum, HEED Bangladesh and LGED are supporting in 
installing various RWH system in the study area. Due to presence of high salinity in groundwater 
as well as in surface water bodies especially in the rivers, RWH in the ponds and storage 
reservoirs are the only source of fresh drinking and cooking water in the study area. In the study 
area, discharge form the roof catchment is a common method of rainwater collection. Gutters 
made of G.I. sheet, bamboo, betel nut tree and bark of banana tree had been used widely for 
rainwater collection. People store rainwater in large earthen vessel and periodically maintain the 
quality of stored rainwater using burnt snail shell (Hussain and Ziauddin, 1989). 
551 
 
 
Figure 2: Location of study area in the southwestern coastal region of Bangladesh 
552 
 
2.2. Water Sample Collection and Laboratory Testing 
 
Harvested rainwater from different storage systems (Ferro-cement jar, Motka, Ferro-cement tank 
and Pond) available in the study area are routinely monitored for a period of six months in both 
the field and laboratory for the physical, chemical and biological water quality parameters for 
drinking purposes. The water is stored in Ferro-cement tank by using tin shed house as catchment. 
Both tin-shed house and Palm-leave shed house are used for collecting rainwater into Motka. In 
each month, four water samples were collected from the four different storage reservoirs and 
transferred to the Environmental Engineering Laboratory at the Department of Civil Engineering 
of Khulna University of Engineering & Technology for subsequent laboratory testing and 
analysis. 
Sampling of stored rainwater was done six times from March to August between 10th to 20th of 
every month, using plastic bottles of 2.0 liters capacity for physicochemical analysis and 
sterilized plastic bags of 200 mL capacity for microbiological analysis (Karim, 2010). Collection 
and preservation of the samples were carried out according to standard methods (APHA, 2000). 
The samples were immediately taken into the Environmental Engineering Laboratory at the 
Department of Civil Engineering of Khulna University of Engineering & Technology for 
subsequent laboratory testing and analysis. The collected rainwater water samples from different 
storages are tested for Color, Turbidity, pH, Alkalinity, Salinity, Total dissolved solids (TDS), 
Total Coliform (TC) and Fecal Coliform (FC). Bacteriological analyses were conducted 
immediately after receiving the samples in the laboratory. Both bacteriological and 
physicochemical analyses were performed according to the standard methods for the examination 
of water and wastewater (APHA, 2000). The water quality parameters were evaluated by 
comparing the test results with both Bangladesh Drinking Water Standard (ECR, 1997) and WHO 
guidelines for drinking water quality (WHO, 2006).   
 
3. Results and Discussions 
 
The quality of the stored rainwater mainly depends on the performance of the various types of 
storage reservoirs such as Ferro-cement tank, RWH Pond, Motka in combination with the 
different roofing systems and sanitary protections. The results of the laboratory-tested parameters 
are presented in Figure 3.   
   The test result shows that almost all values of pH remain within the standard range (6.5 to 
8.5) of Bangladesh standard except some cases (Table 2). Therefore, the stored rainwater is not 
satisfactory in the study area with respect to pH. Although the almost all pH values of the stored 
rainwater in this study were within the acceptable limit, but the values were relatively higher 
(7.8-8.0), which indicates that the stored rainwater is not acidic but alkaline. It can also be shown 
from the test result that the amount chloride presents in the stored rainwater samples are found 
within the Bangladesh standard (Table 1). For three storage reservoirs such as Ferro-cement Tank, 
Motka (Tin-shed house) and RWH pond, the color test of stored rainwater samples shows 
satisfactory result. However, for one source such as Motka with Palm-leave shed house as 
catchment, the value exceeds the allowable limit of Bangladesh standard (Table 2). In case of 
pond water, bacteria were found as well as for rainwater no bacteria existed. Therefore, it can be 
concluded that the rainwater is most advantageous as an alternative drinking source than pond 
water. Turbidity may not exceed levels, which is detrimental to the aquatic life. Turbidity in the 
receiving water, resulting from any discharge may not exceed 150 NTU (Nephelometric Turbidity 
Units) at any time or 50 NTU as a monthly average.  
553 
 
1 2 3 4 5 6
0
3
6
9
pH
Test No.
 Low Allow. Limit  Exp. Result  High Allow. Limit
1 2 3 4 5 6
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
S
al
in
ity
 (m
g/
L)
Test No.
 Experimental Result     Allowable Limit
1 2 3 4 5 6
0
200
400
600
A
lk
al
in
ity
 (m
g/
L)
Test No.
 Experimental Value         Allowable Limit
1 2 3 4 5 6
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
Tu
rb
id
ity
 (F
TU
)
Test No.
 Experimental Value        Allowable Limit
1 2 3 4 5 6
0
300
600
900
1200
To
ta
l D
is
so
lv
ed
 S
ol
id
 (m
g/
L)
Test No.
 Experimental Result       Allowable Limit
1 2 3 4 5 6
0
1
2
3
4
5
Fe
ca
l C
ol
ifo
rm
 (n
/1
00
 m
l)
Test No.
 Experimental Result       Allowable Limit
1 2 3 4 5 6
0
1
2
3
4
5
To
ta
l C
ol
ifo
rm
 (n
/1
00
 m
l)
Test No.
 Experimental Result   Allowable Limit
1 2 3 4 5 6
0
4
8
12
16
C
ol
or
 c
on
c.
 (H
az
en
 u
ni
t)
Test No.
 Experimental Result     Allowable Limit
 
Figure 3a: Test results for stored rainwater in Ferro-cement tank with Tin-shed catchment 
554 
 
1 2 3 4 5 6
0
3
6
9
pH
Test No.
 Low Allow. Limit  Exp. Result  High Allow. Limit
1 2 3 4 5 6
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
S
al
in
ity
 (m
g/
L)
Test No.
 Experimental Result     Allowable Limit
1 2 3 4 5 6
0
200
400
600
A
lk
al
in
ity
 (m
g/
L)
Test No.
 Experimental Value         Allowable Limit
1 2 3 4 5 6
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
Tu
rb
id
ity
 (F
TU
)
Test No.
 Experimental Value        Allowable Limit
1 2 3 4 5 6
0
300
600
900
1200
To
ta
l D
is
so
lv
ed
 S
ol
id
 (m
g/
L)
Test No.
 Experimental Result       Allowable Limit
1 2 3 4 5 6
0
1
2
3
4
5
Fe
ca
l C
ol
ifo
rm
 (n
/1
00
 m
l)
Test No.
 Experimental Result       Allowable Limit
1 2 3 4 5 6
0
1
2
3
4
5
To
ta
l C
ol
ifo
rm
 (n
/1
00
 m
l)
Test No.
 Experimental Result   Allowable Limit
1 2 3 4 5 6
0
4
8
12
16
C
ol
or
 c
on
c.
 (H
az
en
 u
ni
t)
Test No.
 Experimental Result     Allowable Limit
 
Figure 3b: Test results for stored rainwater in Motka with Tin-shed catchment 
555 
 
1 2 3 4 5 6
0
3
6
9
pH
Test No.
 Low Allow. Limit  Exp. Result  High Allow. Limit
1 2 3 4 5 6
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
S
al
in
ity
 (m
g/
L)
Test No.
 Experimental Result     Allowable Limit
1 2 3 4 5 6
0
200
400
600
A
lk
al
in
ity
 (m
g/
L)
Test No.
 Experimental Value         Allowable Limit
1 2 3 4 5 6
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
Tu
rb
id
ity
 (F
TU
)
Test No.
 Experimental Value        Allowable Limit
1 2 3 4 5 6
0
300
600
900
1200
To
ta
l D
is
so
lv
ed
 S
ol
id
 (m
g/
L)
Test No.
 Experimental Result       Allowable Limit
1 2 3 4 5 6
0
1
2
3
4
5
Fe
ca
l C
ol
ifo
rm
 (n
/1
00
 m
l)
Test No.
 Experimental Result       Allowable Limit
1 2 3 4 5 6
0
1
2
3
4
5
To
ta
l C
ol
ifo
rm
 (n
/1
00
 m
l)
Test No.
 Experimental Result   Allowable Limit
1 2 3 4 5 6
0
8
16
24
32
C
ol
or
 c
on
c.
 (H
az
en
 u
ni
t)
Test No.
 Experimental Result     Allowable Limit
 
Figure 3c: Test results for stored rainwater in Motka with Palm-leave shed catchment 
556 
 
1 2 3 4 5 6
0
3
6
9
pH
Test No.
 Low Allow. Limit  Exp. Result  High Allow. Limit
1 2 3 4 5 6
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
S
al
in
ity
 (m
g/
L)
Test No.
 Experimental Result     Allowable Limit
1 2 3 4 5 6
0
200
400
600
A
lk
al
in
ity
 (m
g/
L)
Test No.
 Experimental Value         Allowable Limit
1 2 3 4 5 6
0
4
8
12
16
20
Tu
rb
id
ity
 (F
TU
)
Test No.
 Experimental Value        Allowable Limit
1 2 3 4 5 6
0
300
600
900
1200
To
ta
l D
is
so
lv
ed
 S
ol
id
 (m
g/
L)
Test No.
 Experimental Result       Allowable Limit
1 2 3 4 5 6
0
1
2
3
4
5
Fe
ca
l C
ol
ifo
rm
 (n
/1
00
 m
l)
Test No.
 Experimental Result       Allowable Limit
1 2 3 4 5 6
0
2
4
6
8
10
To
ta
l C
ol
ifo
rm
 (n
/1
00
 m
l)
Test No.
 Experimental Result   Allowable Limit
1 2 3 4 5 6
0
4
8
12
16
C
ol
or
 c
on
c.
 (H
az
en
 u
ni
t)
Test No.
 Experimental Result     Allowable Limit
 
Figure 3d: Test results for stored rainwater directly in RWH pond 
557 
 
   From the study area, it is found that about 33% people drink pond water without any sorts of 
treatment and therefore, there is a high possibility of the risk of spreading the water-borne 
diseases during dry season. In addition, the survey results show that most of the people drink 
rainwater during rainy season, whereas in dry season they suffer for rainwater. In this case, stored 
rainwater can be a viable option for them particularly for meeting up their drinking water demand 
in the dry season. In addition, it is found from this study that the quality of harvested rainwater is 
very good and free from any kind of bacteria, which is clean and fresh enough to use as drinking 
water. 
 
Table 1: Bangladesh drinking water quality standards 
 
Water quality Standards Unit Bangladesh Standards (ECR, 1997) 
Color Hazen Unit 15.0 
Turbidity NTU 5.0 
pH - 6.5-8.5 
Chloride mg/L 150-600 
Alkalinity mg/L as CaCO3 - 
Total Coliform Nos/100ml 0.0 
Fecal Coliform Nos/100ml 0.0 
 
Table 2: Water quality of the harvested rainwater in the study area 
 
Rainwater Storage Sample not satisfying Bangladesh Standard 
Motka (Tin shed house)  pH (Test no. 2) 
Motka (Palm-leave shed house) pH (Test no. 6) 
Motka (Palm-leave shed house) Color (Test no. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 & 6) 
RWH Pond Turbidity (Test no. 1, 2 & 3) 
RWH Pond Bacteria (TC) (Test no. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 & 6) 
 
 
4. Conclusions 
 
In this study, the quality of stored rainwater from the currently practiced various RWH systems in 
Dacope upazila of Khulna district under southwestern coastal areas of Bangladesh are examined 
and evaluated for the sustainable utilization of rainwater as an alternative source of portable 
water supply. Twenty-four stored rainwater samples were collected on a monthly basis (March to 
August) from four different types of storage reservoirs (Ferro-cement tank, Motka, Pond) having 
catchments of different roofing materials (Tin-shed house, Palm-leave shed house) in the 
different RWH options currently being practiced in the study area. The test results indicated that 
for all samples, initially the stored rainwater contains a slightly higher value of pH and maintain 
the acceptable range of Bangladesh standard for drinking water. The test results also revealed that 
in all the cases, other quality parameters (color, turbidity, salinity, alkalinity, suspended matters, 
and total dissolved solids) in the rainwater were found within the allowable limit of Bangladesh 
drinking water standard. In addition, there were no evidences of bacteriological contamination 
observed in the stored rainwater except RWH by using the pond storage, which implies that there 
is a low risk of spreading water borne diseases from the stored rainwater, if rainwater stores in a 
558 
 
suitable storage tank and maintain properly. Therefore, this study conclusively supports the 
utilization of rainwater as a viable and alternative source of drinking water supply of acceptable 
quality in the study area and the similar scarce areas, which are severely affected by the salinity 
and arsenic problems in the southwestern coastal belt of Bangladesh, if it can be maintained 
properly. 
   Up to the present, a few research works have been conducted about the quality issues of the 
stored rainwater in the RWH system. Nowadays, RWH system is a well-known technology in our 
country for solving potable water supply problems. However, it is less developed in the study 
area. Therefore, the present study is recommending some guidelines for promoting RWH in a 
sustainable way in the study area. Food-grade plastic container can be used for rainwater storing 
purpose since in the plastic container different parameters of harvested rainwater usually remain 
constant. The roof to be used as catchment of the storage house should be kept clean during the 
collection of rainwater into storage reservoirs. In addition, the roof should be provided with tin or 
metal sheets in place of locally available palm-leave shed house. Finally, an improved filter 
system can be provided to remove the bacteria on a priority basis from pond water, if it is to be 
used for RWH purpose. 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
The authors wish to express their indebtedness to the Department of Civil Engineering, Khulna 
University of Engineering & Technology (KUET), Bangladesh for extending all sorts of supports 
to use the laboratory and experimental facilities for conducting all the tests of this study. 
 
References 
 
Ahmed, M.F (2002). Alternative Water Supply Options for Arsenic Affective Areas of 
Bangladesh. ITN-Bangladesh and WSP-South Asia, Dhaka. 
Ahmed, M.F. and Rahman, M.M. (2000). Water Supply & Sanitation, Rural and Low Income 
Urban Communities, International Training Network (ITN), Bangladesh University of 
Engineering and Technology (BUET), Bangladesh 
APHA (2000). Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater. American Public 
Health Association, New York. 
ECR (Environment Conservation Rules) (1997), Bangladesh Gazette, Environmental 
Conservation Rules, 1997. Ministry of Environment and Forest, Government of Bangladesh. 
Hussain, M.D, and Ziauddin, A.T.M, (1989). Rainwater Use in Bangladesh – A Case Study in 
Dacope Upazila. Proc. of the 4th Int. Conf. on Rainwater Cistern Systems, Manila, Philippines, 
2-4 August. 
Islam, M.M., Chou, F.N.F. and Kabir, M.R. (2011). Feasibility and Acceptability Study of 
Rainwater Use to the Acute Water Shortage Areas in Dhaka City, Bangladesh. Natural 
Hazards, 56: 93-111. 
Islam, M.M., Kabir, M.R. and Chou, F.N.F. (2010). Quality Assessment of Stored Rainwater and 
Its Utilization in Dhaka City, Bangladesh. Water Practice & Technology, 5(3): 1-8. 
Islam, M.M., Chou, F.N.F., Kabir, M.R. and Liaw, C.H. (2010). Rainwater: A Potential 
Alternative Source for Scarce Safe Drinking and Arsenic Contaminated Water in Bangladesh. 
Water Resources Management, 24: 3987-4008. 
Karim, M.R. (2010). Assessment of Rainwater Harvesting for Drinking Water Supply in 
Bangladesh. Water Science and Technology: Water Supply, 10(2): 243-249. 
559 
 
Karim, M.R. (2010). Quality and Suitability of Harvested Rainwater for Drinking in Bangladesh. 
Water Science and Technology: Water Supply, 10(3): 359-366. 
Lye, D.J. (2002). Health Risks Associate with Consumption of Untreated Water from Household 
Roof Catchment Systems. Journal of the American Water Resources Association, 38(5): 1301-
1306. 
Meera, V and Ahammed, M.M. (2006). Water Quality of Rooftop Rainwater Harvesting Systems: 
A Review. Journal of Water Supply Research and Technology-AQUA, 55: 257-268. 
Pathak, N. and Heijnen, H. (2006). Health and Hygiene Aspects of Rainwater for Drinking. Proc. 
of the 32nd WEDC International Conference, pp. 393-396. 
WHO (World Health Organization) (2006). Guidelines for Drinking Water Quality. World Health 
Organization, Geneva, Switzerland. 
 
 
 
 
560 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
ANALYZING GROUNDWATER QUALITY FROM SHALLOW AQUIFER USING 
REGRESSION TECHNIQUE IN A NORTHWESTERN DISTRICT OF BANGLADESH 
 
 
Sajal Kumar Adhikary1, Md. Monzur Hossain2, Md. Mahidur Rahman3 & Md. Monjur-A-Elahi4 
 
 
ABSTRACT: This paper presents a simple approach of evaluating different groundwater quality 
parameters using linear regression technique. In the present study, Nawabganj district in the 
northwestern part of Bangladesh have been selected as a case study area. Groundwater quality 
data for different upazillas of the district have been collected from the central database of 
groundwater circle of Bangladesh Water Development Board. Different water quality indices 
such as sodium absorption ratio (SAR), magnesium adsorption ratio (MAR), Kelly’s ratio (KR), 
soluble sodium percentage (SSP), residual sodium bicarbonate (RSBC), total hardness (TH), and 
permeability index (PI) are determined to investigate the ionic toxicity. Based on different indices, 
groundwater quality in the shallow aquifer of the study area has been analyzed for drinking and 
irrigation uses. Correlation coefficients among different water quality parameters are obtained by 
developing a correlation matrix of all parameters. Linear regression technique is applied to 
develop regression models of different water quality parameters for predicting different water 
quality constituents having significant correlations with the specific electrical conductance. 
Analysis shows that Calcium, Magnesium and Bicarbonate are highly correlated with Electrical 
Conductivity (EC), but not perfect. Results from the linear regression demonstrate that some 
selected water quality variables such as Sodium, Calcium, Magnesium, Chlorine, Sulphate and 
Bicarbonate are significantly related with Electrical Conductivity (EC) at 1% level of 
significance. Finally, this study concludes that regression technique can be very useful in 
predicting the groundwater quality parameters in other similar areas by measuring a few 
parameters only. 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Water quality performs important role for all living beings. Groundwater has become the main 
source of drinking and irrigation all over the country of Bangladesh. About 70% of irrigation 
water and more than 90% of total potable water in Bangladesh is supplied from groundwater 
source (Mridha et al., 1996). Between 30 and 40 percent of the net cultivable area of the country 
is under irrigation (Huq and Naidu, 2002). The contribution of groundwater in relation to total 
                                                        
1Assistant Professor, Department of Civil Engineering, Khulna University of Engineering & Technology 
(KUET), Khulna, Bangladesh. sajaladhikary@yahoo.com    
2Postgraduate Student, Department of Civil Engineering, Khulna University of Engineering & Technology 
(KUET), Khulna, Bangladesh. monzurce@gmail.com  
3Assistant Engineer, SARM Associates Limited, Dhaka, Bangladesh. rahman.mahid@yahoo.com   
4Deputy Project Engineer, DOM-INNO Builders Ltd., Dhaka, Bangladesh. manjurkuet@gmail.com  
561 
 
irrigated area increased from 41 percent in 1982/83 to 71 percent in 1996/97 and to over 75 
percent in 2001 (Ali, 2003). Ground water quality has turned into an important for water 
resources engineering and environmental issue owing to rapid increase of population, rapid 
industrialization, unplanned urbanization and too much use of fertilizers, pesticides in agricultural 
land. The problems of groundwater quality are more heightened in elevated land areas of 
country’s Northwestern part, as where surface water is not available to use. Groundwater is 
contaminating in these areas when extensive extraction through deep as well as shallow tube 
wells, which create suction of impure surface water into aquifer (Siddeque, 2005). The most 
common contaminant in the groundwater is dissolved nitrogen in the form of nitrate (NO3), 
owing to its high water solubility (Ersoy et al., 2007). High nitrate concentrations in drinking 
water sources present a potential risk to health particularly to infants less than six months of age. 
Many researchers already assess the groundwater quality in different area of Bangladesh such as; 
(Shahidullah et al., 2000) at Phulpur Upazila of Mymensingh district, (Quddus and Zaman, 1996) 
at Meherpur district, (Bahar and Reza, 2009) at Khulna of Bangladesh. They argued that the 
major ions present in the irrigation water are Calcium, Magnesium, Sodium, Bicarbonate, 
Sulphate and Chloride.  
   Groundwater is one of the widely distributed, renewable and most important resources in the 
earth. It is incredibly imperative for Bangladesh since the country’s environment, economic 
growth and infrastructural development all are highly influenced by water to perform local and 
seasonal availability. It is generally considered least polluted compared to other inland water 
resources, but studies indicate that groundwater is not free from pollution though it is likely to be 
free from suspended solids. The major problem with the groundwater is that once contaminated, 
it is difficult to restore its quality. Hence, there is a need in routinely monitoring and concern for 
the protection and management of groundwater quality. It is well known that no straightforward 
reasons can be advanced for the deterioration of water quality, as it is dependent on several water 
quality parameters. There exists strong correlations among different parameters and a combined 
effect of their inter-relatedness indicates the water quality. A few numbers of literatures are 
available regarding the analysis of groundwater quality data using regression techniques for 
prediction purposes in different areas of India (Jain and Sharma, 2000; Kumar et al., 1994; Jain 
and Sharma, 1997; Rao and Rao, 1994). 
   The developed regression equations for the parameters having significant correlation 
coefficients can be successfully used to estimate the concentration of other constituents. A  
systematic study of correlation and regression coefficients of the water quality parameters not  
only helps to assess the overall water quality but also to quantify relative concentration of various 
pollutants in water and provide necessary cue for implementation of rapid water quality 
management plan. In this present study, an attempt has been made to evaluate the quality of 
ground water in the study area and thereby to develop correlation and regression study of various 
physico-chemical parameters. 
 
2.  The Study Area 
 
Chapai Nawabganj District under Rajshahi division) has an area of about 1744 sq. km, which is 
bounded by West Bengal of India on the north, south and west, Rajshahi and Naogaon districts on 
the east (Figure 1). The district consists of 3 municipalities, 33 wards, 134 mahallas, 5 upazillas, 
45 union parishads, 830 mouzas and 1136 villages. The upazilas are Bholahat, Gomastapur, 
Nachole, Nawabganj Sadar, and Shibganj. Municipalities are Nawabganj Sadar, Shibganj and 
Rohanpur. Nawabganj (town) consists of 15 wards and 70 mahallas. It has an area of 46.26 sq. 
562 
 
km. Nawabganj municipality has a population of 153252 and population density is 3313 per sq. 
km. The district is located under barind tract area and consists of diaras and charlands (sandbars 
develop in riverbed). The main rivers are the Ganges, Mahananda, Pagla, Moraganga and the 
Punarbhaba. Beel Bhatia, Beel Choral, Beel Hogla, Beel Singra, Sukrabari Damos, Maricha Dara, 
Beel Putimari, Beel Anal, Kumiradaha are the noted depression. The study area is characterized 
by a hot and humid climatic condition with annual maximum and minimum temperatures are 
37.8 0C and 11.2 0C respectively and annual average rainfall of 1862 mm. This district has mainly 
plane land with rivers. The whole district is full of fertile land with proper irrigation facilities. For 
this reason, the economy is totally dependent on the agriculture. Total cultivable land 132354 
hectares, fallow land 12899 hectares, single crop 46%, double crop 45% and triple crop land 9%, 
cultivable land under irrigation 60%. Groundwater is the main source of drinking and irrigation 
water in this area and majority of the land is being irrigated by shallow and deep tube-wells. The 
groundwater quality is objectionable in toxicity of different inorganic constituents from the 
environmental perspectives and arsenic (As) is well-known constituents out of them in this region. 
 
 
Figure 1: Location of the study area in Bangladesh 
563 
 
3.  Materials and Methods 
 
3.1.  Data Acquisition  
 
This study is mainly based on the data and information available in the field. Data has been 
collected from the public domain database published by the groundwater circle (GWC) of 
Bangladesh Water Development Board (BWDB). A total of 124 data points representing the 
quality of groundwater from the different areas of Chapai Nawabganj district in the northwestern 
region of Bangladesh are collected. The distribution patterns of the collected samples are 
presented in Table 1. 
 
Table 1: Distribution of collected samples 
Name of the Upazilla No. of Data Samples Collected 
Shibganj 25 
Nawabganj Sadar 97 
Nacole 1 
Gomastapur 1 
 
3.2. Calculation of Water Quality Indices 
 
The collected data is analyzed using the different statistical techniques and different water quality 
indices have been calculated using different equations, which are widely used. The Sodium 
Adsorption Ratio (SAR) was calculated by the equation given by Richards (1954) as: 
 
 
2
MgCa
NaSAR

     (1) 
 
Where, all the ions are expressed in meq/L. Magnesium Adsorption Ratio (MAR) was calculated 
according to Raghunath (1987) as: 
 
MgCa
MgMAR



100
    (2) 
                                            
Where, all the ionic concentrations are expressed in meq/L. Soluble Sodium Percentage (SSP) 
was calculated by the equation given by Todd (1980): 
 
 
KNaMgCa
KNaSSP



100
   (3) 
 
Where, all the ions are expressed in meq/L. The Residual Sodium Bi-carbonate (RSBC) was 
calculated according to Gupta and Gupta (1987): 
 
564 
 
CaHCORSBC  3     (4) 
 
Where, RSBC and the concentration of the constituents are expressed in meq/L. The Permeability 
Index (PI) was calculated based on Doneen (1962) by using the following equation: 
 
 
NaMgCa
HCONa
PI



1003    (5) 
Where, all the ions are expressed in meq/L. Total Hardness (TH) was calculated by using the 
equation given by Raghunath (1987): 
 
  50 MgCaTH     (6) 
 
Where, TH is expressed in meq/L (ppm) and the concentrations of the constituents are expressed 
in meq/L. The Kelly’s Ratio was calculated using the equation proposed by Kelly (1963) as: 
 
MgCa
NaKR

      (7) 
 
Where, all the ionic concentrations are expressed in meq/L. 
 
3.3. Correlation Matrix and Development of Regression Equations 
 
The electrical conductivity (EC) data is correlated with those of other quality parameters of 
groundwater. The correlation coefficients for the 10 physico-chemical parameters were 
determined. Let X and Y be any two variables (that is physico-chemical parameters in our case) 
and (X, Y) be n pairs of the observed values of these variables (i= 1, 2…n). Then the correlation 
coefficient between these variables X and Y is given (Trivedy and Goel, 1984) by the well-known 
relationship. In this paper, ordinary least squares (OLS) regression with one regressor 
(independent variable) in the form of bXaY  . The regression values R2 and adjusted R2 
reveals whether the regressors are good at predicting or explaining the values of the dependent 
variable in the sample of the data at hand (Pindyck and Rubinfeld, 1997). An adjusted value of R2 
is always preferred to R2 as it considers the degrees of freedom in estimating the parameters. 
However, R2 and/or adjusted R2 do not describe whether (i) an included variable is statistically 
significant; (ii) the regressors are a true cause of the movements in the dependent variable; (iii) 
there is omitted variable bias; or (iv) indication of selecting the most appropriate sets of 
regressors (Joarder et al., 2008).  
 
4. Results and Discussions 
 
The statistical analysis of the different physicochemical parameters and water quality indices of 
the collected data in Nawabganj district of northwestern Bangladesh are performed. The 
maximum and minimum concentration i.e. the range of the different physicochemical parameters 
of groundwater quality constituents such as temperature (T), pH, Electrical Conductivity (EC), 
565 
 
Dissolved Organic Carbon (DOC), Arsenic (AsTot & AsIII), Sodium (Na), Potassium (K), 
Magnesium (Mg), Calcium (Ca), Iron (Fe), Manganese (Mn), Chloride (Cl), Sulphate (SO4), Bi-
carbonate (HCO3), and Nitrate (NO3-N) are presented in Table 2 along with the mean, median 
and standard deviations for each parameter. In addition, the maximum and minimum range of the 
different water quality indices such as Sodium Adsorption Ration (SAR), Magnesium Adsorption 
Ration (MAR), Soluble Sodium Percentage (SSP), Residual Sodium Bi-carbonate (RSBC), 
Permeability Index (PI), Total Hardness (TH), and Kelly’s Ratio (KR) along with the mean, 
median and standard deviations of all indices parameters are given in Table 3. In the study area, 
the range of pH value lies within the range 5.9 to 8.0, which indicates the alkaline nature of 
groundwater. It also indicates that the water is suitable for drinking as well as for irrigation 
purpose since concentration within the safe limit of 6.5 to 8.5 standard set by the WHO (2006) 
and ECR (1997) of Bangladesh. The EC values varies from 285 to 1744 μS/cm indicating the 
high mineralization in the region for both drinking and irrigation purposes. In addition, As and Cl 
values are within the acceptable limit of ECR (1997) except very few samples, which implies that 
groundwater in the shallow aquifer is suitable for drinking and irrigation purposes. 
 
Table 2: Summary Statistics of total collected samples 
 
Parameters Unit Max. Min. Mean Median Std. Dev. 
T (0C) 28.8 24.0 26.74 26.90 0.8755 
pH - 8.0 5.9 6.99 7.02 0.2606 
EC (μS/cm) 1744 285 775.69 734.00 251.105 
DOC (mg/L) 9.4 0.01 1.68 1.40 1.3841 
AsTot (μg/L) 2400 0.3 146.51 6.40 394.583 
AsIII (μg/L) 2540 0.2 84.63 5.00 322.502 
Na (mg/L) 138 5.2 32.56 20.85 26.8399 
K (mg/L) 22.2 0.5 4.03 4.00 3.1484 
Mg (mg/L) 102 6.34 27.11 24.75 12.6525 
Ca (mg/L) 259 26.5 107.23 104.00 36.7210 
Fe (mg/L) 10.3 0.005 1.47 0.37 2.2344 
Mn (mg/L) 4.36 0.001 0.73 0.70 0.6042 
Cl (mg/L) 328 1.0 22.91 8.85 41.8558 
SO4 (mg/L) 335 0.1 16.59 4.10 37.0701 
HCO3 (mg/L) 826 169 477.12 469.00 124.861 
NO3-N (mg/L) 68 0.005 1.60 0.26 6.9930 
 
Table 3: Summary statistics of Different Indices 
 
Parameters Max Min Mean Median Std. Dev. 
SAR 2.2100 0.1449 0.7234 0.4678 0.5255 
MAR 44.1242 18.6792 29.0629 28.2537 4.2707 
SSP 39.4802 5.7511 16.1036 12.1576 8.5867 
RSBC 5.3252 -4.7787 2.4689 2.3664 1.2850 
PI 93.2009 27.1925 48.3789 45.9902 10.6397 
TH 1045.3024 92.2029 379.0604 363.4351 137.8975 
KR 0.6466 0.0464 0.1922 0.1180 0.1403 
566 
 
   The methodical calculation of correlation 
coefficient between different water quality 
variables and regression analysis provides an 
indirect way of quick monitoring of water 
quality in an area (Joarder et al., 2008). The 
correlation matrix developed for different 
groundwater quality variables in the study area 
is presented in Tables 4 and 5. It is obvious that 
distribution of all constituents (except DOC, Fe, 
Mn, and As) were significantly correlated (r > 
0.5) with EC. The level of significance is taken 
at 5%. The  result shows that there exists 
highly positive correlation coefficient among 
EC and Mg (0.863), EC and Ca (0.910), EC and 
HCO3 (0.820), Mg and Ca (0.829), Mg and SO4 
(0.753), Ca and HCO3 (0.786), SSP and SAR 
(0.939), PI and SAR (0.823), KR and SAR 
(0.936), PI and SSP (0.745), KR and SSP 
(0.994), PI and KR (0.749), while highly 
negative correlation coefficient is observed 
between PI and TH (0.676). A positive high 
correlation between K and Na indicates that the 
groundwater is suitable for irrigation. In 
addition, a good correlation between Ca and Cl 
provides us an idea regarding the total hardness 
of water (Joarder et al., 2008). However, in this 
study, K and Na have a highly negative 
correlation, which indicates the unsuitability of 
shallow groundwater for irrigation purpose. 
Therefore, it can be concluded that the 
correlation studies of the water quality 
parameters have a great significance in the study 
of water resources. 
   It is well known that adjusted R2 constitute a 
number of properties, which makes it a more 
desirable means of goodness-of-fit than R2. 
However, the difficulty with R2 as a measure of 
goodness-of-fit is that R2 pertains only to 
explained and unexplained variation of Y 
(dependent variable) and thus, it does not 
account for the number of degrees of freedom. 
On the other hand, adjusted R2 uses variances, 
not variations and thus, eliminating the 
dependence of the goodness-of-fit on the 
number of independent variables in the model 
(variance equals variation divided by the 
degrees of freedom) (Joarder et al., 2008). The 
567 
 
adjusted R2 values of different water quality parameters with EC are presented in Table 6. It is 
obvious that EC is the most appropriate variable explaining more than 90, 86, 81, 69, 63, 45, and 
41 % values of the dependent variable in the sample of the collected data, which explains the fact 
that the variance of the residual is small compared to the variance of the dependent variable. It 
should be mentioned here that correlation techniques do not involve with an implicit assumption 
of causality, while regression techniques do the same. The choice of dependent and independent 
variables in a regression model is crucial. The dependent variable is a variable to be explained, 
while the independent variable is a moving force (Pindyck and Rubinfeld, 1997). In this study, 
two variables least square approach is applied to develop a relationship between EC as an 
independent variable and different water quality variables such as Na, K, Mg, Ca, Cl, SO4, HCO3, 
NO3-N as dependent variables. In this study, only those parameters are considered, which have a 
correlation coefficient values greater than 0.4 based on the values given in the Table 4. All the 
developed regression equations are presented in Table 6. The results of ordinary least square 
regression (OLS) are presented in the first column of Table 6, with only the EC as control 
variable and a constant. In the second column, the values of adjusted and multiple correlation 
coefficient among different variables are provided. The third column values reveal that all 
dependent variables are significant at 1% level with the independent variable EC. All the 
regression equations are developed for 124-2 = 122 degrees of freedom. The significance is 
supported by the t-test and F-test results (Table 6). In addition, the robustness of the developed 
models are checked by computing the concentration of selected water quality variables, which 
showed a reasonable agreement between the observed and the computed variables. 
 
Table 5: Correlation coefficients among different indices 
 
Parameters SAR MAR SSP RSBC PI TH KR 
SAR 1.000       
MAR 0.522 1.000      
SSP 0.939 0.477 1.000     
RSBC 0.378 0.342 0.394 1.000    
PI 0.507 0.211 0.745 0.291 1.000   
TH 0.196 0.232 -0.098 -0.154 -0.676 1.000  
KR 0.936 0.466 0.994 0.406 0.749 -0.106 1.000 
 
Table 6: Regression equations for different groundwater quality parameters 
 
R Regression Equations Adjusted  Multiple p-value* t-values F-values 
Na = -20.68 + 0.06863*EC 0.638 0.642 0.0001 9.25 85.59 
K = -0.125 + 0.00535*EC 0.419 0.427 0.0001 5.21 27.18 
Mg = -6.61 + 0.04347*EC 0.862 0.863 0.0001 18.85 355.24 
Ca = 4.03 + 0.13304*EC 0.909 0.910 0.0001 24.20 585.84 
Cl = -55.71 + 0.10136*EC 0.604 0.608 0.0001 8.46 71.58 
SO4 = -62.93 + 0.10251*EC 0.691 0.694 0.0001 10.66 113.59 
HCO3 = 160.70 + 0.40792*EC 0.819 0.820 0.0001 15.85 251.07 
NO3-N = -9.57 + 0.01440*EC 0.511 0.517 0.0001 6.67 44.50 
 Note: * indicates significance at the 1% level 
568 
 
5.  Conclusions 
 
In this paper, water quality data from a shallow aquifer of Nawabganj district in northwestern 
Bangladesh has been analyzed and different regression models have been developed. It is 
concluded that the linear regression equations developed for predicting the concentration of 
different parameters based on electrical conductivity can satisfactorily be applied within 
reasonable precision. It is obvious that electrical conductivity is the most appropriate variable in 
predicting or explaining more than 90, 86, 81, 69, 63, 45, and 41 % values of the dependent 
variable in the sample of the collected data in the study area, which demonstrates the fact that the 
variance of the residual is small compared to the variance of the dependent variable. The present 
study conclusively proves the potential application of the correlation and regression techniques 
for analyzing and studying groundwater quality parameters and its significance in the study of 
water resources. Therefore, similar linear regression technique can be applied for other regions of 
the country to predict the level of significance. 
 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
The authors wish to express thanks to the Bangladesh Water Development Board (BWDB) for 
providing their database in a public domain website, which is the key information for this study. 
 
 
References 
 
Ali, M.A. (2003). Fate of Arsenic Extracted with Groundwater. Available at: 
http://www.unu.edu/env/arsenic/Dhaks 2003/02 (Accessed on 05 December, 2011). 
Bahar, M.M. and Reza, M.S. (2009). Hydrochemical Characteristics and Quality Assessment of 
Shallow Groundwater in a Coastal Area of Southwest Bangladesh. Environmental Earth 
Science, 61(5): 1065-1073.   
Doneen, L.D. (1962). The influence of crop and soil on percolating waterS. Proc. of Biennial 
Conf. on Groundwater Recharge, pp. 156-163. 
ECR (Environmental Conservation Rules of Bangladesh) (1997). Environmental Conservation 
Rules, 1997. Ministry of Environment and Forest, Government of Bangladesh. 
Ersoy, A.F., Ersoy, H. and Gültekin, F., (2007). Nitrate, Nitrate and Ammonia Contamination in 
Groundwater: A Case Study from Gümüshaciköy Plain, Turkey. Asian Journal of Water, 
Environ. Pollut., 4(1): 107-118. 
Gupta, S.K. and Gupta, I.C. (1987). Management of Saline Soils and Water. Oxford and IBH 
Publication Co. New Delhi, India. 
Huq, S.M.I. and Naidu, R. (2002). Arsenic in Groundwater of Bangladesh: Contamination in the 
Food Chain. Arsenic Contamination in Bangladesh, Dhaka: ITN Bangladesh. pp 69-72. 
Jain, C.K. and Sharma, M.K. (1997). Relationship among Water Quality Parameters of 
Groundwater of Jammu District. Pollution Research, 16(4): 241-246. 
Jain, C.K. and Sharma, M.K. (2000). Regression Analysis of Groundwater Quality Data of Sagar 
District, Madhya Pradesh. Indian J. Environ. Health, 42(4): 159-168. 
Joarder, M.A.M., Raihan, F., Alam, J.B. and Hasanuzzaman, S. (2008). Regression Analysis of 
Groundwater Quality Data of Sunamganj District, Bangladesh. Int. J. of Env. Res., 2(3): 291-
296. 
569 
 
Kelly, W. P., (1963). Use of Saline Irrigation Water. Soil Sci., 95(4): 355-391. 
Kumar, G..S.N. and Gopal K. (1994). Relationship between Electrical Conductivity and Cationic 
and Anionic Contents in Groundwater. Indian J. Environ. Protect,14(7): 595-603. 
Mridha. M.A.K., Rashid, M.H. and Talukder, K.H. (1996). Quality of Groundwater for Irrigation 
in Natore District of Bangladesh. J. Agric. Res, 21:15-30. 
Pindyck, R.S. and Rubinfeld, D.L. (1997). Econometric Models and Economic Forecasts, 4th 
Edition, Irwin McGraw-Hill Companies, USA. 
Quddus, K.G.. and Zaman, M.W. (1996). Irrigation Water Quality in Some Selected Villages of 
Meherpur in Bangladesh. Bangladesh J. Agric. Sci., 23(1): 51-57. 
Raghunath, I.I.M. (1987). Groundwater. 2nd Edition; Wiley Eastern Ltd., New Delhi, India. 
Rao, K.S. and Rao, B.S. (1994). Correlations among Water Quality Parameters of Groundwater 
of Musunur Mandal, KrishnaDistrict. Indian J. Environ. Protect. 14(7): 528-532. 
Richards, L.A. (1954). Diagnosis and Improvement of Saline and Alkali Soils, In: Agricultural 
Handbook 60, USDA and IBH Pub. Co. Ltd., New Delhi, India. pp: 98-99. 
Shahidullah, S.M., Hakim, M.A., Alam, M.S. and Shamsuddoha, A.T.M. (2000). Assessment of a 
Groundwater Quality in a Selected Area of Bangladesh. Pakistan Journal of Biological 
Sciences, 3(2): 246-249. 
Siddeque, M., (2005). Groundwater Status of Sylhet. Draft Report, Institute of Water Modelling 
(IWM), Dhaka. 
Todd, D.K. (1980). Groundwater Hydrology. Wiley International Edition, John Wiley and Sons. 
Inc., New York. 
Trivedy, R.K. and Goel, P.K. (1984). Chemical and Biological Methods for Pollution Studies. 
Environmental publications, Karad. 
WHO (World Health Organization) (2006). Guidelines for Drinking Water Quality. World Health 
Organization, Geneva, Switzerland. 
 
 
 
570 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
POWER CHALLENGE FOR A SUSTAINABLE FUTURE: PERSPECTIVE 
BANGLADESH 
 
 
Rezwan Ahmed1 and Riasat Khan2 
 
 
ABSTRACT: Electricity is the corner stone of national economy. It can be generated from non-
renewable and renewable energy sources. Non-renewable energy sources are easy to use and can 
be translated to different forms. But world reserve of non-renewable resources are fast depleting. 
Moreover, burning of nonrenewable fossil fuel is triggering global warming through greenhouse 
gas emissions. Renewable energy sources are getting popularity. But low efficiency and limited 
access to mass people are hindering its accessibility. Nuclear power generation is also marching 
forward in spite of its security and waste management issues. People are more interested in 
sustainable energy sources which can be both renewable and non-renewable. It is actually 
provision of use of such energy sources that meet the needs of the present without compromising 
the ability of future generations to meet their needs [1]. It gives a balance of three dimensions- 
environmental protection, economic growth and social development. Bangladesh is mainly 
dependent on mono-fuel for the generation of electricity. Reserve and resources are enough to 
meet the market demand for a long term. But due to lack of appropriate vision, good management 
and lack of political commitment the country has failed to economically explore and exploit these 
resources for economic development. The main goal of this paper is to seek out different 
feasibilities and options for power sector of Bangladesh to attain sustainability. Alongside these 
the problems associated with the power sector have been figured out and the possible solution has 
been discussed. Bangladesh should opt for proper energy mix in this time of power crisis for a 
sustainable future. 
  
Keywords: Sustainability; Economy; GHG Emission; Renewable Energy; Conventional Source; 
Power Plant; Electricity. 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Electricity is the secondary and most preferred form of energy. It is the essential ingredient for 
economic and social development and most important pre-requisite for attracting both domestic 
and foreign investors. Bangladesh has got substantial natural gas resource and significant but 
                                                        
1 Operation and Maintenance Engineer, Shahjibazar Power Company Limited, Sylhet, Bangladesh. 
2 Lecturer, Green University of Bangladesh and MS Student, University of Dhaka. 
 
571 
 
almost untapped high quality coal resource. There is also plenty of scope to generate solar power, 
wind power and energy from bio fuels. Many countries of the world like Japan, Korea do not 
have any basic fuel resource yet they are among the top developed nations. They import almost 
their entire requirement of the fuel for energy generation from highly competitive energy market. 
Bangladesh energy market is not very large. Reserve and resources are definitely enough to meet 
market demand for a long term. But due to lack of appropriate vision, good management and 
strong political commitment the country has failed to economically explore and exploit the 
resources to utilize for economic development. The exploration and exploitation of basic 
resources to fuel energy generation did not match energy demand growth. The deficit increased in 
geometrical progression. Consequently the country is now suffering from the worst energy crisis 
of its history. Entire country is suffering from 8-10 hours load shedding on the average despite of 
the fact that only around 35% of its 15 million people have direct access to power supply [2]. 
Industrial growth has come to almost standstill due to inadequate gas supply. Existing industries 
cannot be operated properly due to unsteady supply of energy. 
 
Table 1 World Proven Fossil Fuel Reserve [3] 
 
Country/ Region Coal Billion tons Oil  Billion tons Gas Trillion cft 
Total North America 246 9.7 313 
Total Europe & Eurasia 272 19.2 2221 
Bangladesh 2.9 .007 7.2 
Saudi Arabia - 36.3 267 
Total Middle East 33 ( Includes Africa) 102 (41%) 2681 (60%) 
Africa - 16.6 518 
Total Asia Pacific 254 5.6 544 
Total World 826 10.8 6534 
 
   Bangladesh has a very limited reserve of non- renewable resources. Bangladesh is highly 
relying on natural gas reserve, but it is very less compared to the other countries and world 
reserve. So there should be a diversity of gas consumption for the sustainable future.  
   The main goal of this paper is to seek out different feasibilities and options for power sector of 
Bangladesh. Alongside these the associated problems is also figured out. For such purposes 
different intellectuals and government officials have been visited to collect their views and ideas 
to support the paper. Bangladesh should opt for optimum energy mix in this time of power crisis 
for a sustainable future. 
 
2. Non Renewable Energy Sources 
 
Non-Renewable energy is energy which is taken from the sources that are available on the earth 
in limited quantity and cannot be re-generated within a short span of time. Non-renewable 
sources are not environmental friendly and can have serious effect on our health. Non-renewable 
sources exist in the form of fossil fuels, natural gas, oil and coal. 
572 
 
 
2.1. Coal 
 
Bangladesh has 5 discovered coal mines- Barapukuria, Phulbari, Dighipara, Khalspeer and 
Jamalganj. The total coal reserves in 5 coal fields of Bangladesh are estimated to be 2.9 billion 
metric tons (equivalent to 67 TCF of gas) [4]. Recovery rate of coal from reserves varies with the 
choice of technology and method of mining. If modern mining technology can be adopted 
ensuring strong regulatory supervision and monitoring about 85% coal from Barapukuria, 
Phulbari and Dighipara can be recovered. Substantial reserves of coal, estimated at 1,000 Mt, are 
known to exist in the Jamalganj and Rajshahi areas, but they lie at a depth in excess of 900 m, 
making exploitation both difficult and expensive. In light of severe power crisis in the country, 
coal resources in five coal fields in Bangladesh have high potential to meet the immediate energy 
needs. But there are always controversies about the methods that are best for the extraction of the 
coal without endangering the socio-political and natural environment.  
 
2.1.1. Mining techniques suited for Bangladesh 
There are many advantages and disadvantages of both surface and underground Coal mining in a 
densely populated and agriculturally rich area in Dinajpur and Rangpur districts. Underground 
coal mining mine has a strong aquifer above coal layer and does not have strong roof support and 
this mining can also leads to several disasters like underground gas formation, water flooding, 
and subsidence. All Coal mines of Bangladesh have 100-200 m thick water saturated soft sand 
overburden. This water saturated creates serious challenge for both open pit and underground 
mining. In case of underground mining these water layer will make shaft sinking extremely 
difficult and expensive. There will be great possibility of water flooding and accidents. In case of 
surface mining massive darning out of water to keep mine area dry may cause major 
environmental problem. Modern surface mining facilitate proper restoration of mined area to 
original and better state. On the other hand underground mining induces subsidence and 
permanent loss of land. Modern open pit mining includes professional surface and subsurface 
water manage. 
 
2.2. Gas 
 
Among all the fossil fuels gas is the cleanest & gas fuelled power station require less space as it 
can be transported through pipes. Combined cycle power plant, which is operated only by gas is 
the most efficient compared to all other power plants. Gas is more widely distributed; 
intermediate cost & price fluctuation is less. But it has variety of uses not only in power 
generation but also in RMG industry, fertilizer Company, household, transport etc. Bangladesh is 
now facing acute gas shortage. Many fertilizer industries are forced to shut down to divert more 
gas for power production. CNG stations are also shut down for 6 hours daily from August 2010. 
Gas consumers in many areas of Dhaka city and suburbs are experiencing serious crisis that  
forced them to use alternative fuel instead of gas for cooking.  According to BPDB, due to gas 
shortage at least 500-700 MW of power cannot be generated in spite of having available capacity. 
573 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1 Sector wise gas consumption of Bangladesh [5] 
 
2.2.1. Developing own gas accessibility 
The accessibility of gas can be increased by more exploration and production and by proper gas 
transmission and distribution monitoring. The following recommendations if carried out can 
ensure gas availability to mass people. 
 Adopt appropriate depletion strategy. There must be plan for required secondary and tertiary 
recovery from each gas field, setting up well head compressor stations. 
 Carry out regular bottom hole pressure survey and other required reservoir study.  
 Adaptation of 4D integrated reservoir management 
 All gas supply must come under metering system. If possible telemetry must be introduced 
for online monitoring of gas distribution. Prepaid metering must be introduced for all 
domestic and commercial consumers. 
 Pipeline supply of gas to all multi-storied residential units, major hotels and restaurants can 
be replaced with LPG. 
 Train local personnel, petroleum and reservoir scientists so that they can take part in the 
exploration process for clear monitoring. 
 Public awareness should be increased regarding misusing gas. 
 More transmission pipelines should be constructed like Bakhrabad to shiddhirganj and 
Hobigonj to Ashugonj for proper distribution. 
 
2.2.2. Gas import possibility 
Cross border energy trading is a well-practiced way of sharing energy resources. Countries of 
many regions of the world share their national resources through inter country pipelines or power 
transmission grid.  SAARC region can have inter-country or multination energy grid. Bangladesh 
can have, Iran –Pakistan –India-Bangladesh pipeline and Myanmar-Bangladesh-India pipeline. 
But none of this has taken shape till now. 
 
2.2.3. Liquid Natural Gas (LNG)  
LNG is a type of natural gas that has been super-cooled to minus 2600F (-1620C). At that 
temperature, natural gas condenses into a liquid. In liquid form, natural gas takes up to 600 times 
44%
13% 13%
16%
11%
3%
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
45%
50%
power fertilizer captive 
power
industrial domestic others
574 
 
less space than in its gaseous state, which makes it feasible to store and transport over long 
distances. Bangladesh should try to boost the production of their own gas and also should import 
LNG for the sake of future energy security and sustainability. Diversity of fuel is required to 
attain sustainability and also the inefficient PPs should be replaced by new combined cycle PPs. 
 
2.3. Oil 
 
Oil is mostly used in internal combustion engines, diesel/gas turbine power plants to satisfy the 
peak loads.  But at present GOB is planning to install diesel and HFO based PPs which will 
create additional financial burden on national economy. Solely dependence on oil can hamper the 
economic growth because Bangladesh does not possess any oil rig and it has to depend mainly on 
imported oil. So insatiability of world oil market price can shake the country’s economy. But to 
confront and overcome the present power crisis immediately oil based expensive PPs may be one of 
the best solutions. Therefore considering all these matters oil based PPs may not be the best 
solution for a long term plan. Economic life time, efficiency, GHG emission and noise problem 
of these PP is also a matter of concern. 
 
3. Renewable Energy Sources 
 
Renewable Energy Sources comes from sun, wind, waves etc. which cannot be used directly but 
can be manipulated to produce electricity. With increasing technological advancement the 
accessibility and reliability of such energy sources are getting popularity. But its low efficiency 
and complexity are hindering its progress. These sources support sustainable development by 
reducing carbon emissions. This contributes to increasing energy and climate security for many 
communities across the world. 
 
3.1. Hydropower 
 
Hydro power is derived from the force or energy of moving water, which may be harnessed for 
useful purposes. Hydropower is manifested in the force of the water on the riverbed and banks of 
a river. Hydro power is a renewable source of energy.  At present the only hydro PP in 
Bangladesh Kaptai on Karnafuli river generates 230 MW of power (reservoir size 777 sq. km), 
which is 4.19% of total power. Though Bangladesh is a riverside country, the rivers are not 
suitable for run-off hydro power plants. About 800 rivers including tributaries flow through the 
country constituting a waterway of total length around 24,140 km. Most of the country's land is 
formed through silt brought by the rivers which is inappropriate for hydro power. Bangladesh is 
flat terrain country, so reservoir based hydro plant is also not suitable for Bangladesh with 
exceptions in some hilly regions in the northeast and southeast parts of the country. High fatality 
rate of hydro PPs should also be considered. Bangladesh can import hydro electricity from 
neighboring countries Bhutan, Nepal, Myanmar, and India by bilateral agreements. On October 
575 
 
2010 Bhutan urged to invest in power & energy in Bangladesh under Public Private Partnership 
(PPP) Initiative [6]. Under a bilateral agreement signed in July 2006, India has agreed to purchase 
as much as 5,000 MW of power from Bhutan by 2020. But on September 2010 Myanmar has 
rejected the proposals made by GOB to set up joint venture power plants on their land across the 
border as Myanmar has already made such deals with China.  
 
3.2. Wind Power 
 
Though wind power is the most expanding renewable sources, there has been a common 
misconception that wind cannot be considered as one of the sources of energy for Bangladesh. 
This is because of the technically poor data provided by meteorological stations on the basis of 
which primary speculations were made. Actually Bangladesh does not have a reliable wind 
mapping data on which basis we can predict wind power is suitable for Bangladesh or not.   Some 
pilot projects are working well producing a substantial amount of electricity. All these 
demonstrate the feasibility of electricity generation from wind power in Bangladesh. Assessment 
of resources and installation of wind energy conversion systems (WECS) in Bangladesh has long 
been hindered due to lack of reliable wind speed data [7]. There is no reported wind map of 
Bangladesh by any organization that could be relied upon and used for wind energy assessment. 
A long-term surface measurement (3–5 year average) is vital for making a quality wind resource 
assessment.  
   Local energy experts of Bangladesh are in near unanimous agreement that wind power 
probably has a huge potential in this power-starved country. But we have to take cautious 
approach in developing this relatively cheaper power source. The success of wind power depends 
mainly on the availability of appropriate wind pattern/mapping data and a suitable tariff rate that 
would help attract investment. There  will  have  to  be  detailed  wind  mapping  to  determine  
the  former,  while  the government will have to offer feed-in-tariff to attract investment. 
  
3.3. Biomass Energy 
 
Biomass, a renewable energy source, is biological material from living, or recently living 
organisms, such as wood, waste, (hydrogen) gas, and alcohol fuels. Biomass is commonly plant 
matter grown to generate electricity or produce heat. According to perspective of Bangladesh, 
crop residues, animal & municipal waste and biogas have huge potential for power generation. 
By using biomass for power generation, we can ensure energy security, reduce negative 
environmental consequence, and reach out off-grid areas where grid electricity is not available. 
 
3.4. Solar Energy 
 
Solar energy involves capturing and harnessing the sun’s energy. Solar photovoltaic (PV) panels 
or solar cells convert daylight into electricity. Bangladesh is a world leader in solar energy. The 
solar home system program (SHS) initiated by IDCOL, a government-owned financing company, 
is one of the world’s most successful solar energy programs. It installed over 300,000 SHS of 30-
85 Wp in the country’s villages between 2003 and 2008, benefiting over 1.5 million Bangladeshis  
[8]. Though solar energy is a renewable source of energy which does not emit GHG, it is not 
576 
 
Table 2 Perspective of Bio-Power in Bangladesh [9] 
 
Biogas 
 
o 4 million potential households with adequate cattle/poultry. 
o Biogas is used for cooking purpose 
o One 50 kW biogas based power plant is being financed by 
IDCOL & about 15 kW installed by others, BRAC & LGED. 
o Potential for 800 MW. 
Biomass o There are about 500 auto rice mills in Bangladesh that produce 
8-9 million tons of rice husk annually. 
o Potential to generate 400 MW of electricity. 
Improved stove Potential is more than 20 million. 
Biomass briquetting Large potential of briquettes, especially for cooking and artisan 
use. 
Bio-mass 
gasification 
Provide power for meeting the energy needs of the rural small 
industries, commercial establishments and households 
 
ideal for bulk power generation as it is expensive compared to other energy sources. Poly 
crystalline and second/third generation solar cells should be widely used in Bangladesh to make 
solar power more popular.   
 
4. Nuclear Power 
 
Nuclear power is produced by controlled nuclear reactions. Commercial and utility plants 
currently use nuclear fission reactions to heat water to produce steam, which is then used to 
generate electricity. The basics of nuclear power is strong nuclear force/binding energy, E = mc2. 
 
Table 3 Fuel requirement for a 1000 MW Power Plant per year [10] 
 
Fuel Amount Transporting Vehicles 
Coal 2.2 million ton 200,000 ton cargo boats X 11 
Oil 1.4 million ton 200,000 ton tankers X 7 
Natural Gas 1.1 million ton 200,000 ton tankers X 5.5 
Nuclear 30.0 ton 10 ton trucks X 3 
577 
 
 
   Fuel cost is minimum for nuclear power compared to other fuel based power generation. Very 
small amount of fuel is required for a NPP. As a result transport cost of the fuel is minimum and 
the transportation of the fuel causes least pressure on the road and water.  
   The generation cost of electricity in nuclear PP is less sensitive to fuel price fluctuation. Overall 
electricity generation cost is minimum for nuclear PP compared to the other fuel based PP. It will 
be even cheaper if carbon tax ($ 20to60/ton) is considered. 
   Though nuclear PP is one of the best options for long term power generation, it has some 
demerits which should be considered such as high initial cost, operational safety, nuclear 
accidents and waste disposal of nuclear PP. Nuclear Power is now drawing attention of the global 
energy planners in the backdrop of climate change & energy sustainability.  
 
4. Recommendations 
 
4.1. Power forecasting software 
 
There is different software by which electric system forecasting and expansion planning can be 
done e.g. WASP, SyAM, GT-Max etc. Among these WASP IV is the latest and has enhanced 
facility which is designed to find the economically optimal generation expansion policy for an 
electric utility system within user-specified constraints. It utilizes probabilistic estimation of 
system -production costs, energy cost, and reliability. It has option for introducing constraints on 
environmental emissions, fuel usage and energy generation. 
 
4.2. Inefficient power plants 
 
The cost of saving one unit of energy through energy efficiency strategies is much less than 
producing a unit of energy through new generation. The overall efficiency of public owned PP is 
very low and most of them have extended economic life. These inefficient PPs should be 
replaced as urgent basis with combined cycle PP. 
 
4.3. Minimization of transmission and distribution loss  
 
Bangladesh power structure has a high transmission and distribution loss which can be minimized 
by using underground 11 kV distribution line, higher at least 400 kV transmission line, HVDC 
transmission line and replacing old transformers. Low line voltage is also a primary cause for 
higher T & D loss. Many of the electrical equipment like induction motor draw more current 
when the terminal voltage is lower. 
 
4.4. Minimization of system loss 
 
System loss can be minimized by introducing prepaid energy meter, energy efficient appliances 
e.g. PFI plant, CFL bulb, electronics ballast, LED/ solar street light, day light savings and 
reducing illegal connection of electricity and corruption of field level officers.  
578 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2 Efficiency of public owned PP [2] 
 
 
4.5. Renewable energy policy and feed-in-tariff 
 
Renewable energy is one of the best options for Bangladesh. As we are in the tropical region 
solar power can be very promising and wind energy has a good potential for coastal and hilly 
areas, islands and remote areas. For popularization of renewable energy renewable energy policy 
and feed-in tariff can be introduced. A very reliable wind mapping data is also required for wind 
power. 
 
4.6. Reducing direct electricity wastage 
 
Direct electricity wastage at the consumer level, e.g. light, fan, ac- consuming high ratings of 
electricity should be reduced. There are some sectors where electricity wastage is being 
overlooked. An example of such wastage can be in water treatment system. Huge amount of 
electrical energy is required for the purification of the water in WASA. The other sector where 
wastage can be reduced is in the waste disposal. We can separately dispose the waste in the 
recycle bin in wet and dry categories. This will make the waste and recycling plant to use less 
energy separating the wastes that can be recycled from the bulk waste. Glass recycling is also an 
effective way to save energy and environment. 
 
4.7. Strong political will and sectorial governance 
 
GOB cannot start extraction of their own coal and nuclear PP because they do not have strong 
political will and sectorial governance. There is lack of proper incentives in energy industry to 
attract and retain competent professionals. Public Procurement Act should be updated to attract 
more investment in energy and power sector. 
 
 
579 
 
5. Conclusion 
 
In this paper various options for power generation in perspective of Bangladesh is discussed in 
brief. The population density of Bangladesh is very high, highest 9th in the world. This has to be 
considered for coal fired STPP, as it requires the highest area compared to any other PPs. Nuclear 
PP and LNG fired CCPP can be considered for base load. For short term solution GOB can take 
initiative to construct diesel or furnace oil based PP which will be expensive. For long term 
solution STPP should be constructed near the mine mouth and should be fed by our own 
extracted coal. Hydro electricity and gas through pipelines can also be imported from 
neighboring countries. Mono fuel dependency on gas for power generation should be reduced. 
Renewable energy sources should also march in to create diversity and sustainability. Last of all, 
software can be used to find the economically optimal generation expansion policy. The future 
optimum energy mix should not only depend on environmental issues, but also on technological, 
economic, supply, logistics and political factors.     
 
References 
 
[1] World Energy Assessment-energy and the challenge for sustainability, UNDP, UNDES & 
WEC, 2000, p. 439. 
[2] BPDB annual report 2009-10. 
[3] BP Statistical Review of World Energy, June 2000. 
[4] Petrobangla annual report 2010. 
[5] BAPEX annual report 2009. 
[6] A.K.M.S. Islam and M. Ahiduzzaman (2011). GHG Emission and Renewable Energy Sources 
For Sustainable Development In Bangladesh. Proc. 1st Int. Conf. on Environmental Technology 
and Construction Engineering for Sustainable Development. Sylhet, Bangladesh, pp. 29-40.     
[7] M.S. Hossain, S. Islam, K.R. Sultana and M.F. Hasan (2011). Feasibility Study of Wind 
Energy in Bangladesh: A Way towards Sustainable Development. Proc. 1st Int. Conf. on 
Environmental Technology and Construction Engineering for Sustainable Development. Sylhet, 
Bangladesh, pp. 287-295.  
[8] M.W. Zaman, M. Faisal, A.R. Kuddus and S. Kuddus (2011). Solar Photovoltaic Technology: 
Green Electricity can Mitigate Power Crisis in Bangladesh. Proc. 1st Int. Conf. on Environmental 
Technology and Construction Engineering for Sustainable Development. Sylhet, Bangladesh, pp. 
367-374.        
[9] N. Dasgupta, M.A Baqui, S. Dhingra, P. Raman, M. Ahiduzzaman and V.V. Kishore (2003). 
Benefits of Improved Rice Husk Combustion, Bangladesh. NRI Report no. 2764, pp. 8, 21, 67. 
[10] Ministry Of International Trade & Industry: Nuclear Power Generation, 1998. 
580 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
REMOVAL OF PHENOL BY LOCALLY ISOLATED HIGH PERFORMANCE PHENOL 
DEGRADING STRAIN 
 
 
Md. Mahiudddin1, A. N. M. Fakhruddin1, and Abdullah-Al-Mahin2 
 
 
ABSTRACT: Biodegradation or biotransformation of organic contaminants by members of soil 
micro flora is an important means by which these substances are removed from the environment 
thus preventing from becoming a severe pollution problem. Many researchers have been reported 
that biodegradation constitutes the primary mechanism for the organic contaminant removal. A 
number of microorganisms with a great potentiality are used in biodegradation. In this study five 
phenol degrading strains were locally isolated from soil and screened for obtaining more potential 
isolate. Among them one of strain was selected and identified as Pseudomonas fluoresecns by 
morphological and biochemical tests. The strain was designated as P. fluoresecns PU1. 
Degradation was studied up to 1200 mg/l of phenol for aerobic shake flask culture at 37oC. By 
this isolate, 1000 mg/l of phenol was completely degraded within 72 h of incubation period. 
Maximum degradation rate and corresponding cell growth was also studied. After study the 
enzyme activity it was found that these isolate degraded phenol via a meta- cleavage pathway. 
 
 
1. Introduction  
 
Phenols, an aromatic compound widely used in industries and are characteristic pollutants in 
wastewater and effluents from chemicals, petrochemicals, pharmaceuticals, textiles, and steel 
industries (Rocha et al., 2007). The unwholesome and environmentally unacceptable pollution 
effects of the phenolic effluent have been reported worldwide (Ruiz-Qrdaz et al., 2001). Removal 
of phenol pollutants from contaminated sites has been a major environmental concern today. 
Different techniques have been applied to remove phenolic compounds from polluted areas (Wu 
et al., 2000; Lazarova et al., 2004; Kujawski et al., 2004; Hamad et al., 2005; Carmona et al., 
2006). However, among all biodegradation process offers the more opportunities to completely 
destroy the pollutants if possible or at least to transform them to innocuous substance (Vidali, 
2001), it posses relatively low cost, no chemicals used and high public acceptance (Atlas et al., 
1999). 
   A typical pathway for metabolizing an aromatic compound like phenol is to dihydroxylate the 
benzene ring to form a catechol derivative and then to open the ring through ortho or meta 
                                                        
1 Dept. of Environmental Sciences, Jahangirnagar University, Savar, Dhaka, Bangladesh. 
2 IFRB, Atomic Energy Research Establishment (AERE), Dhaka, Bangladesh. 
 
581 
 
oxidation. Catechol is either oxidized in a reaction catalyzed by catechol 1,2-dioxygenase which 
is described as an ortho-cleavage pathway, or is oxidized in reaction catalyzed by catechol 2,3-
dioxygenase the meta-pathway to 2-hydroxymuconic semialdehyde. The final products of both 
the pathways are molecules that can enter the tricarboxylic acid cycle (Powlowski et al., 1994; 
Harayama et al., 1992). 
 
 
2. Materials and Methods 
 
2.1 Culture medium 
 
The minimal medium used in the degradation studies, adapted from (Goulding et al., 1988) 
contained (g/L) K2HPO4, 4.36; NaH2PO4, 3.45; NH4Cl, 1.0; MgSO4.6H2O, 0.912; trace salts 
solution 1ml/l. The trace salts solution was prepared separately in distilled water and was stored 
in a dark bottle for 6-8 weeks. The trace salts solution contained (g/100 ml): CaCl2.2H2O, 4.77; 
FeSO4.7H2O, 0.37; CoCl2.6H2O, 0.37; MnCl2.4H2O, 0.10; Na2MoO4.2H2O, 0.02. The pH of the 
medium was adjusted to 7.0 with 2M NaOH. Phenol was added to the minimal medium after 
sterilization. Minimal media together with phenol was used for biodegradation studies.  
 
2.2 Isolation and screening of phenol degrading bacteria 
 
The soil samples were collected aseptically from different sites under three inches depth from the 
surface soil. The samples were taken in pre-sterilized Meckatny bottle and capped air tightly. One 
gram of soil was suspended in 9.0 ml sterile distilled water, agitated for mixed well. After 
dilution, 0.1 ml suspension was spread over Pseudomonas minimal agar plates (pH 7±0.1) 
containing 200 ppm of phenol as sole carbon and energy source. Spread plate techniques as 
described by APHA (1975), were followed in our study. All plates were incubated for 24-48 h at     
37 oC. A number of bacterial colonies showing on plates were selected, streaked twice on 
Pseudomonas minimal agar plates by replica plate method (Lederberg et al., 1952) for 
purification. When a streaking produced only one type of colony in a plate, it was considered to 
be pure culture (Sharp et al., 1969). For obtaining high potential isolates a preliminary screening 
was done employing Pseudomonas minimal agar plates with 500 ppm concentration of phenol. 
Among the five high tolerant bacteria, further secondary screening was conducted applying 800 
ppm of phenol in liquid media.  
   Five microbial strains (designated as PU1, PK2, PK3, PK4 and PF6) obtained as described 
above were maintained as pure culture over minimal agar slants at 4oC for further studies. Thus 
the most tolerant isolate was finally characterized on the basis of morphological, cultural and 
biochemical properties (Goodfeelow, 1994; Holl et al., 1994; Collins et al., 1987).  
 
2.3 Identification of the Isolate 
 
The selected bacterial isolate PU1 was identified by morphological and biochemical 
characterization as per the Bergey’s Manual of Systematic Bacteriology (Tortora et al., 2004; 
Holt, 1993). Bergey’s Manual of Determinative of Bacteriology (Buchanan et al., 1984) and 
582 
 
‘ABIS6’ online software (accessed on 20 January 2011) were used as a reference to identify the 
isolate. 
2.4 Cultural conditions 
 
Isolate PU1 was used to inoculate in nutrient broth (1.3%, w/v) and incubated at 37oC for 24 h 
with agitation at 120 rpm. The harvested cells were centrifuged at 5000 rpm for 10 minutes and 
washed twice with 0.01M sodium phosphate buffer and final pellet resuspended in the same 
buffer. Five ml of bacterial suspension (≈106 to 108) (Goulding et al., 1988) was used to inoculate 
95 ml sterile minimal medium containing appropriate phenol concentration in 250 ml conical 
flasks. Media was sterilized by autoclaving prior to the addition of phenol.  After inoculation, 
flasks were incubated in an orbital shaker at 120 rpm at 37 °C. Samples were aseptically removed 
at regular intervals and analyzed for cell growth and phenol removal. Samples were aseptically 
taken for biomass and phenol assay. Cells were removed by centrifugation at 5000 rpm for 10 
minutes and the supernatants were analyzed for phenol removal. 
 
2.5 Measurement of growth of the organisms 
 
Growth was monitored by using optical density measurement at 660 nm (OD660) (Hannaford et 
al., 1999) using UV-spectrophotometer (Shimadzu 1601). 
 
 
3. Data Analysis 
 
3.1 Calculation of specific degradation rate 
 
The specific degradation rate by the bacterial isolate under specific conditions was calculated as 
the following: 
                                                                                                  (1) 
 
Where, ∆ [phenol] was the difference of phenol concentrations between two sampling times 
(mg/L) and ∆ [t] was time difference in hours. 
 
3.2 Chemical analysis  
 
Phenol concentrations were determined by using the 4-aminoantipyrene colorimetric method 
based on the procedure detailed in Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and 
Wastewater (APHA, 1998).  
 
3.3 Statistical analysis 
 
The experimental data was analyzed using Sigma plot 7 (2001) and Microsoft Office Excel 2007. 
 
583 
 
4. Enzyme Assay 
 
4.1 Preparation of cell free extract 
 
Cells were grown on phenol (600 ppm) was harvested by centrifugation (4000 rpm, 10 min) and 
the resulting pellet was washed twice with 0.33 M Tris–HCl buffer (pH 7.6). The cells were 
broken by sonication for 4 minutes (30sec on, 30 sec off) and centrifuged at 12000 rpm, 4 oC for 
20 min. The cell-free extract was kept on ice and assayed as soon as possible for catechol 
dioxygenase activity using the method of (Feist et al., 1969).  
 
4.2 Catechol 1,2-dioxygenase activity 
 
The ortho -cleavage product of catechol is catechol 1,2-dioxygenase was measured by following 
the formation of cis,cis -muconic acid. The following reagents were added to a quartz cuvette: 2 
ml of 50 mM Tris–HCl buffer (pH 8.0); 0.7 ml of distilled water; 0.1 ml of 100 mM 2- 
mercaptoethanol and 0.1 ml of cell-free extract. The contents of the cuvette were mixed by 
inversion and 0.1 ml of catechol (1 mM) was then added and the contents mixed again. The 
absorbance read at 260 nm over a period of 5 min and cis,cis -muconic acid formation was 
indicated by the increase of absorbance.  
 
4.3 Catechol 2,3-dioxygenase activity 
 
Catechol 2,3-dioxygenase activity was measured by following the formation of 2-
hydroxymuconic semialdehyde, the metacleavage product of catechol. The following reagents 
were added to plastic cuvette: 2 ml of 50 mM Tris–HCl buffer (pH 7.5 ), 0.6 ml of distilled water 
and 0.2 ml of cell - free extract. The contents were mixed by inversion and 0.2 ml of catechol 
(100 mM) was added and mixed with the contents. 2-Hydroxymuconic semialdehyde production 
was followed by an increase in absorbance at 375 nm over a period of 5 min. 
 
4.4 Calculation of enzyme activity 
 
The enzyme activity(µ moles product formed/min) was calculated by using the following 
equation:  
 
                                                                                                   (2) 
 
Molar extinction coefficient for catechol 1,2-dioxygenase, E260 = 16,800 1/mol/cm and for 
catechol 2,3-dioxygenase, E375= 14,700 mol/l/cm. 
 
Specific activities(µ moles/min/mg) were expressed as units per milligram of protein calculated 
by the following equation:  
 
584 
 
                                                                                                  (3) 
 
The protein concentrations in cell - free extracts were determined by the method of Lowry et al., 
(1951), with bovine serum albumin as the standard.  
 
 
5. Results  
 
5.1 Isolation and screening of phenol degrading bacterial cultures 
 
Phenol degrading bacteria were isolated from the soils adjacent to the plant roots. Sample soils 
were cultivated on Pseudomonas minimal media containing 200 ppm of  phenol as sole carbon 
and energy source at 37 0C. Five phenotypically different colonies (PU1, PK2, PK3, PK4 & PF6) 
were picked from the plates and transferred to fresh Pseudomonas minimal agar plates with 400 
ppm of phenol for purification (Mutzel et al., 1996). After purification, all these isolates were 
grown on solid minimal medium containing 800 ppm of phenol as sole carbon and energy source 
within 72 hours. But only the isolate PU1 and PK3 were shown their ability to grow on solid 
media containing 800 ppm of phenol. The microbial strain PU1 was finally selected as most 
tolerant isolate by performing liquid culture with 800 ppm of phenol as sole carbon and energy 
source.  
 
5.2 Identification 
 
The isolate PU1 was short-rod and round in shape, Gram negative, gave positive catalase and 
oxydase activity. It gave negative result for methyl red and indole test. Isolate PU1 also gave 
positive result for Voges-proskauer test and able to hydrolyze gelatin. The strain utilized glucose, 
fructose, sucrose, xylose and sorbitol but did not utilize rhamnose, arabinose, and lactose. On 
account of morphological, biochemical and carbohydrate utilization tests, it was identified as 
Pseudomonas fluorescens (Buchanan et al., 1984; ‘ABIS6’, 2011). Finally, the isolate was 
designated as Pseudomonas fluorescens PU1. 
 
5.3 Phenol degradation and cell growth by Pseudomonas fluorescens PU1 
 
The experiment aimed to find the highest tolerance level of phenol concentrations on our isolate. 
The P. fluorescens PU1 strain was allowed to grow for 72 h in the Pseudomonas minimal 
medium containing phenol at different concentrations as the sole source of carbon and energy. 
This isolate could completely degrade phenol up to 600 ppm in 24 hours (Figure 1) and at this 
time the bacterial cell growth (i.e., OD660) was 0.873, where the initial OD660 was 0.110. After 24 
hours the cell density was recorded to be decreased with time (Figure 2) since absence of carbon 
source. 
 
585 
 
Incubation time (h)
0 24 48 72
Ph
en
ol
 c
on
ce
nt
ra
tio
n 
(p
pm
)
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
600 ppm
800 ppm
1000 ppm
1200 ppm
 
 
Figure 1 Removal of various concentration of phenol by P. fluorescens PU1 when supplied as the 
sole source of carbon and energy 
 
    Incubation time (h)
0 24 48 72
O
D
 a
t 6
60
 n
m
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
600 ppm
800 ppm 
1000 ppm
1200 ppm
 
 
Figure 2 The growth of P. fluorescens PU1in different phenol concentration at different time 
intervals 
 
586 
 
It was observed that the rate of phenol removals correlates with growth rate of bacteria at 
different concentrations. It was found that, the high growth of bacteria happened in phenol initial 
concentration of 1000 ppm with maximum degradation rate (Figure 3). 
 
 
 
Figure 3 Removal rate of phenol for different concentration by the isolate Pseudomonas 
fluorescens PU1 at different incubation period 
 
Pseudomonas fluorescens PU1 also completely degraded 800 ppm and 1000 ppm of phenol in 72 
h, whereas it degrades about 99% of phenol in 48 h as well (Figure 1). The highest cell growth as 
measured by OD660 was found at 72 h for 800 ppm and 1000 ppm of phenol as 0.999 and 1.055 
respectively (Figure 2 & 3). The results exhibited that, the phenol removal correlated with growth 
of bacteria and the highest growth of bacteria was found in case of 1000 ppm phenol when 
complete degradation occurred. It was observed that in case of 1200 ppm of phenol, isolate PU1 
showed lower efficiency in phenol degradation and it could degrade only 6.45 per cent phenol 
within 72 h. The growth of PU1 was inhibited with 1200 ppm phenol and OD660 was only 0.183. 
The removal rate of phenol at different concentration by P. fluorescens PU1 was observed and it 
is significant in the sense that phenol removal rate was directly related to the cell growth. The 
removal rate was increased with the increasing concentration of phenol upto 1000 ppm. At 1200 
ppm cell growth was inhibited although PU1 still had a slower removal rate at this concentration. 
Temperature at 37 oC was maintained during degradation studies.   
 
 
 
 
 
587 
 
Table 1 Removal rate, removal time and removal efficiency of the P. fluorescens PU1 isolate 
when grown on various concentrations (600-1200 ppm) of phenol within 72 hours incubation 
time 
 
Phenol 
(ppm) 
Incubation 
time (h) 
Removal rate 
(ppm/h) 
Removal 
efficiency (%) 
     24 25 
     48 - 
600 
     72 - 
100 
     24 19.583 
48 13.420 
800 
72 0.333 
100 
24 6.833 
48 34.460 
1000 
72 0.375 
100 
24 0.375 
48 1.792 
1200 
72 1.040 
6.45 
 
 
5.4 Analysis of enzyme activity of the organisms 
 
Analysis of inter cellular enzyme activity indicated that Pseudomonas fluorescens PU1 showed 
greater meta-activity than ortho-activity which demonstrate degradation occurred using the meta-
cleavage pathway. Specific enzyme activity carried out following growth on phenol confirmed 
this (Table 2). Catechol 2,3- dioxygenase activity towards a number of catechol was induced in 
cell grown on phenol. No identifiable activity of Catechol 1,2-dioxygenase was found.  
 
 
Table 2 Enzyme activities in cell extracts during the degradation of phenol by P. fluorescens PU1 
 
Enzyme assayed  Activity, U Specific activity (U/mg) 
Catechol 1,2-dioxygenase 
Catechol 2,3-dioxygenase 
3×10-3 
0.1417 
0.0090 
0.429 
 
Specific enzyme activities are expressed in micromoles per minute per milligram of protein. 
 
 
 
 
 
588 
 
6. Discussion 
 
A number of aerobic phenol degrading bacteria have been described previously by other 
researchers (Lin et al., 2008; Jame et al., 2010; Wasi et al., 2010; Movahedyan et al., 2009). The 
concentration of phenol and presence of halo substrates seems to play a crucial role on 
degradation shown in our study and also reported by others. High concentrations of phenol are 
usually inhibitory to growth of organisms (Lin et al., 2008). In the present investigation, the P. 
fluorescens PU1 was found to be highly efficient in phenol degradation. Thus, the study has 
provided a potential phenol degrading isolate that can be effectively used to promote the phenol 
degradation in the contaminated sites as well as waste water treatment system. 
   The efficiency of a certain catabolic pathway often depends on the properties of the involved 
key enzyme(s). Therefore, the specific activities of phenol hydroxylase, catechol 1,2-dioxygenase 
and catechol 2,3-dioxygenase in cell-free extracts obtained by sonication from investigated 
isolate was examined.  
   Enzyme activity was determined for the organism when grown on phenol because growth 
substrate can influence the enzyme produced. Catechol is the common intermediate in aromatic 
degradation and can be metabolized via either the ortho or meta cleavage pathways (Nair et al., 
2008). 
   After reviewing various literatures on the already established, it was found that phenol 
degraded in both ortho and meta- cleavage pathway although ortho- pathway is most common 
(Nair et al., 2008; Nilotpala et al., 2007; Farrell et al., 2002).  
   Successful metabolism of phenol appears in these studies to require the meta-cleavage pathway. 
Assays of the key enzymes involved in the ring cleavage of catechol 1,2 - dioxygenase and 
catechol 2,3 - dioxygenase indicated that degradation of the phenol P. fluorescens PU1 was via 
the meta- cleavage pathway. Cells grown on phenol displayed greater meta-activities mainly 
towards catechol, while ortho-activity was very low. This suggests that P. fluorescens PU1 
possesses meta -cleavage enzyme, a catechol 2,3 - dioxygenase capable of metabolising catechol. 
 
 
7. Conclusions  
 
The aerobic phenol degrading isolate Pseudomonas fluorescens PU1 appears to have greater 
potential for enhanced phenol removal through utilization of phenol as sole source of carbon and 
energy. Resistance against high concentration of phenol facilitates its use for biological treatment 
system of wastewater. Complete degradation of such high concentration of phenol (1000 ppm) by 
meta-pathway is not well demonstrated previously. Here we report these isolate capable of 
growth at relatively high phenol concentrations together with the analysis of functional properties 
relevant to the application of this organism to the biodegradation of aromatic wastes (phenolics). 
Further studies on degradation and biochemical characteristics are under investigation.  
 
 
 
 
 
589 
 
Acknowledgements  
 
I’m are grateful to the authority of IFRB, Atomic Energy Research Establishment (AERE), 
Dhaka for their laboratory supports in completing this study. Thanks Zahid, Umor, Ami, and  
Pijush for their help in this study. 
 
References  
 
‘ABIS6’ online-bacteria identification software, http://www.tgw1916.net.bacteria_logare.html, 
accessed on Jan 20, 2011. 
APHA (American Public Health Association). (1975). “Standard Methods for the examination of 
water and wastewater,” 14th edn., pp.(6): 77- 90, APHA, AWWA, WEF, Washington. 
APHA (American Public Health Association). (1998). “Aggregate organic constituents,” in 
Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, (A.E. Greenberg, L.S. 
Clesceri, & A.D. Eaton eds.), 20th edn, pp. 5.31-5.33. APHA, AWWA & WEF. 
Atlas, R.M. and Unterman R. (1999). Bioremediation In: Industrial Microbiology & 
Biotechnology, (2nd Ed).  ASM Press, Washington, pp. 666-681. 
Buchanan, R.F., Gibbons, N.F. (1984). Bergey’s Manual of Determinative Bacteriology (9th 
edn.). Baltimore, Williums and Wilkins Co. 
Carmona, M., De Lucas, A., Valverde, J.L., Velasco, B. and Rodríguez, J.F. (2006). Combined 
adsorption and ion exchange equilibrium of phenol on Amberlite IRA-420. Chem. Eng. 
Journal, 117:155–160. 
Collins, C.H. and Lyne, M.P. (1987). “In: Microbiology methods,” Butterworth and Co Ltd., vol. 
32. 
Farrell, A. and Quilty, B. (2002). “Substrate-dependent autoaggregation of Pseudomonas putida 
CP1 during the degradation of monochlorophenols and phenol, “Journal Industrial Microbiol 
Biotechnol, 28: 316–324. 
Feist, C.F. and Hegeman, G.D. (1969). Phenol and benzoate metabolism by Pseudomonas 
putida: regulation of tangential pathways.  Journal  Bacteriology, 100: 869–877. 
Goodfeelow, M. (1994). “Bergey’s manual of determinative bacteriology 9th edition,” Williams 
and Wilkins. London. 
Goulding, C.J., Gillen, and Bolton, E. (1988). “Biodegradation of substituted benzenes,” Journal 
Applied  Bacteriology, 65: 1-5. 
Hamad, A., Aidan, M., Fayed, and Mehrvar, M. (2005). Experimental investigation of phenolic 
wastewater treatment using combined activated carbon and UV processes. Clean Technol. 
Environment Policy, 7:177–181. 
Hannaford, A.M. and Kuek, C. (1999). “Aerobic batch degradation of phenol using immobilized 
Pseudomonas putida,” Journal of industrial microbiology and Biotechnology, 22: 121-126. 
Harayama, S., Kok, M. and Neidle, E.L. (1992). Functional and evolutionary relationships 
among diverse oxygenases. Annual Review of Microbiology, 46:565–601. 
Holl, J.G., Kreig, N.R., Sneath, P.H.A., Staley, J.T. and Williams, S.T. (Eds.). (1994). “Bergey’s 
Manual of Determinative bacteriology,” 9th edn., Williams and Wilkins, Baltimore, Maryland, 
USA. 
Holt, J.G. (1993). Bergey’s manual of determinative bacteriology (9th ed.). Williams & Wikilins, 
New York. 
590 
 
Indu Nair, C., Jayachandran, K. and Shankar Shashidhar. (2008). “Biodegradation of phenol,” 
African Journal of Biotechnology, 7(25): 4951-4958. 
Jame, S.A., Rashidul Alam, A.K.M., Fakhruddin, A.N.M. and Alam, M.K. (2010). “Degradation 
of Phenol by Mixed Culture of Locally Isolated Pseudomonas Species,” Journal of 
Bioremediation and Biodegradation, 1:102. doi:10.4172/2155-6199.1000102. 
Kujawski, W., Warszawski, A., Ratajczak, W., Porębski, T., Capała, W. and Ostrowska, I. 
(2004). Removal of phenol from wastewater by different separation techniques. Desalination, 
163:287–296. 
Lazarova, Z. and Boyadzhieva, S. (2004). Treatment of phenol-containing aqueous solutions by 
membrane-based solvent extraction in coupled ultrafiltration modules. Chem. Eng. Journal, 
100:129–138. 
Lin, L., Reddy, M., Moorthi, V. and Qoma, B.E. (2008). “Bacterial removal of toxic phenols 
from an industrial effluent,” African Journal of Biotechnology, 7(13): 2232-2238. 
Lowry, O.H., Rosebrough, N.J., Farr, A.L. and Randall, R.J. (1951). Protein measurement with 
the folin phenol reagent. J Biol Chem, 193: 265– 275. 
Movahedyan, H., Khorsandi, H., Salehi, R. and Nikaeen, M. (2009). “Detection of phenol 
degrading bacteria and Pseudomonas putida in activated sludge by Polymerase Chain 
Reaction (PCR),” Iran Journal of Environ. Health Science Engineering, 6: 115-120. 
Mutzel, A., Reinscheid, U.M., Antranikian, G. and Muller, R. (1996). “Isolation and 
characterization of a thermophilic bacillus strain that degraded phenol and cresols as sole 
carbon source at 70o C,  46: 593-596. 
Nilotpala, P. and Ingle, A.O. (2007). “Mineralization of phenol by Serratia plymuthica strain GC 
isolated from sludge sample,” Int. Biodeterior. Biodegradation, 60(2): 103-108. 
Powlowski, J. and Shingler, V. (1994). Genetics and biochemistry of phenol degradation by 
Pseudomonas sp. CF 600. Biodegradation, 5:219-236. 
Rocha, L.L., De Aguiar, C.R., Cavalcante, R.M., Do Nascimento, R.F., Martins, S.C.S., 
Santaella, S.T. and Melo, V.M.M. (2007). Isolation and characterization of phenol-degrading 
yeasts from an oil refinery wastewater in Brazil. Mycopathologia, 164:183–188. 
Ruiz-Qrdaz, N., Riuz-Luganez, J.C., Castanon-Gonzalez, J.A., Hernandez-Manzano, E., 
Cristiani-Urbina, E. and Galindez-Mayer, J. (2001). Phenol biodegradation using a repeated 
batch culture of Candida Tropicalis ina multistage bubble column. Revista Latinoamericana 
de Microbiologia, 43:19-25. 
Tortora, G.J., Funke, B.R., and Case, C.L. (2004). Microbiology: An introduction. Pearson 
Benjamin Cumming, United State. 
Vidali, M. (2001). Bioremediation. An overview.  Pure Applied Chemistry, 73:1163–1172. 
Wasi, S., Tabrez, S. and Ahmad, M. (2010). “Isolation and Characterization of a Pseudomonas 
fluorescens Strain Tolerant to Major Indian Water Pollutants,” Journal of Bioremediation and 
Biodegradation, 1:101. doi:10.4172/2155-6199.1000101. 
Wu, J., Rudy, K. and Sapark, J. (2000). Oxidation of aqueous phenol by ozone and peroxidase.  
Advanced Environment Research, 4:339–346. 
 
 
 
 
591 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
EVALUATING THE ADAPTATION STRATEGY OF LIVELIHOOD PATTERN IN THE 
WATER LOGGED AREA OF SOUTH-WEST COASTAL BANGLADESH 
 
 
Sangeeta Rani Mollick 1 and Abul Kalam Azad2 
 
 
ABUSTRACT: Now a day’s water logging is a burning problem in Bangladesh in the context of 
climate change. Among South-West (S-W) Coastal Regions most affected district is Satkhira and 
the study area of this research is Tala Upazila in Satkhira district. The main goal of this study is 
to focus on the present vulnerable condition and to evaluate the adaptation strategies of livelihood 
pattern in the study area. The data have been collected from primary and secondary sources and 
the primary data have been collected through questionnaire survey. Peoples in the study area 
practice alternative adaptation optionshich minimize their loss and damage caused by water 
logging. Due to water logging, livelihood options in the study area have been totally changed. 
The effects of occupational change decrease income level. People in the study area have already 
adapted with different sectors like agriculture, sanitation, occupation, water resource etc. to 
sustain better livelihood pattern. 65% respondents follow alternative income source to develop 
their economic conditions. 30% households are fully involved in floating bed agriculture and 
80% women are involved in duck rearing. In the year 2000, no one involved in hanging vegetable 
gardening but presently 65% people are involved. 60% respondents are interested in floating bed 
agriculture in future for their economic development.  
 
Keywords: Water logging, Adaptation, Livelihood pattern, Environmental impact, Income level, 
Economic development, South-West region. 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
The situation when water remains stagnant for long time due to lack of proper drainage system 
and creates much adverse impact on daily life is known as water logging. It is one kind of 
disaster. However, flood and water logging are closely related with each other. Flood is the cause 
of water logging and water logging is the result of flood. And adaptation is the evolutionary 
process whereby a population becomes better suited to its habitat. Adaptation is mainly needed in 
vulnerable condition.  
 
 
 
1Research student, Environmental Science Discipline, Khulna University, Khulna-9208, Bangladesh, e-
mail: sangeetasaurav@gmail.com 
2 Professor, Environmental Science Discipline, Khulna University, Khulna-9208, Bangladesh, e-mail: 
azad_ku@yahoo.com 
 
 
 
592 
 
   The South-West(S-W) Coastal Region mainly includes the whole of Khulna, Satkhira and 
Bagerhat districts and adjacent southern part of Jessore district. The South - West Costal Region 
(SWCR) stands out as unique and sensitive in terms of ecology and environment and is the most 
fertile region in Bangladesh (Tutu, 2004).  But in present situation, the most of the water logged 
area of S- W region is in Khulna, Jessore, and Satkhira district. Rapid siltation at the regulators 
of downstream and poor management of sluice gate, created blockage in the drainage channels 
which ultimately resulted water logging (Mostafizur, 1995). Water logging in some part of 
Bangladesh has been also causing an emerging problem for human lives, living condition and 
affecting income generating function along with changing surroundings over the years. During 
this situation adaptation is mostly needed in South-West coastal Bangladesh.  
   There have been several related works on water logging in south-west part of Bangladesh but in 
Tala upazila, (Dhandia & Sarulia union) the socio-economic and environmental effects and its 
adaptation due to water logging is scanty. This is why, the work has been undertaken to 
investigate the present vulnerable conditions and evaluate the adaptation strategy of livelihood 
pattern in Tala upazila (Dhandia & Sarulia union), Satkhira. 
 
 
2. Methodology 
 
Three villages (Barokasipur, Sarulia and Putiakhali) of Sarulia union and two villages (Senergati 
and Katakhali) of Dhandia union under Tala Upazila of Satkhira District in Bangladesh were 
considered as study area.  Data were collected during the period of February to April 2011. The 
household was considered as sampling unit and simple random sampling procedure was used for 
data collection. Out of total 3406 households the sample size was 132, obtained from the 
following equation (Kothari, 2008). 
 
       Z2 pqN 
 n=                                                                                   (1) 
       e2 (N-1)+Z2 pq 
 
 [Where, n = Sample size; z2 = The value of the standard variant at a given confidence level; p = 
Sample proportion; q = 1-p; e = Acceptance error and N = Population size for the village. When, 
p =10% of the house hold, i.e. 0.1; q = 0.9; z = 1.96 (for 95% confidence level the value of z is 
1.96) and e = 0.05 (since the estimate should be within 5% of the true value)]. 
 
 
3. Results and Discussion 
 
The native impact of water logging on the environment in the study area has been quite far-
reaching. The research work has focused on how people themselves see their effects on nature 
and society and also has focused the adaptation practices which minimize their loss and damage 
caused by water logging. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
593 
 
3.1 Vulnerable sectors to water logging in the study area 
 
Most of the sectors in the study area go by vulnerable situation during water logging time. 
                      
 
 
Figure 1 Vulnerable sector in the study area due to water logging 
 
Figure 1 shows that most of the vulnerable sector is occupation and that is 35%. Another 
vulnerable sectors are agriculture, sanitation, household, education are 25%, 20%, 15% and 5% 
respectively. 
 
3.2 Environmental impacts in the study area caused by water logging 
 
3.2.1 Change of cropping pattern 
In Rabi season Boro paddy, varieties of pulse grow. In Kharip-1 season jute, Aush paddy grows. 
In Kharip-2 Amon paddy grows. (Source: Upazila Agricultural office, Tala) 
 But due to water logging the seasonal crop cannot grow at the accurate time. 
 
 
 
Figure 2 Cropping pattern in the study area 
 
 
 
 
594 
 
Figure 2 represents that after water logging triple crop land becomes 0% because most of the time 
land is inundated by water. Rest of the time land grows single and double crops. Double crops 
grow more because it meets the demand of the people in the study area. 
 
3.2.2 Livelihood options 
The people of the study area have various types of livelihood options, such as agriculture, 
agriculture labor, business, services, others day labor, van puller, fishing, etc. Due to water 
logging there is a great change in occupational pattern in the study area. Agriculture based work 
decrease day by day for the present situation. The agriculture and agriculture labor was the main 
in 2000 and that were 16.67% and 40% respectively. But now that are 10 %. The new 
occupation is adding at present situation and that is fishing. In 2000 people engaged in fishing 
was 0% but in 2005 and 2010 that is 3.33% and 6% respectively. Another occupation increase in 
the water logged area that is van pulling. The present percentage of van pulling is 16.67% which 
was 5.33% before water logging (Table 1).  
 
3.2.3 General income level 
Water logging has also a great impact on income level. From the Table 1 it is found that, the 
income level decreases day by day from 2000 to 2010. In a situation land has lost its utility. 
Income level <1000 was 3.33% in 2000 but in 2010 this is 20%. <1000 income level increase but 
another income level such as 1001-5000, 5001-7000, 7001-13000, >13000 decrease from 2000 to 
2010 due to lack of proper occupation in the water logged area. This is the general income 
situation. Peoples in the study area faced this situation for the last 7-8 years. But they also find-
out alternative income source to increase their income level and maintain their life better than 
previous. 
 
3.2.4 Food habit change 
The percentages of rice are only 23.33% in 2010 where it was 53.33% in 2000 (Table 1). The rate 
of vegetable intake is also decreased because low vegetable production. Most of the agricultural 
and vegetation land are water logged. So the collecting of rice and vegetable are very difficult for 
the general people. Fish consumption increase because most of the beel and pond are over flowed 
and fishes are available here and there during water logging condition. But eggs and milk 
consumption decrease because most of the live stocks are declined due to water logging. So, food 
condition exists in a very poor condition. 
 
3.2.5 Energy consumption pattern 
Water logging has severely affected the indigenous sources of fuel in the study area. The social 
forestry around the homestead, bushes and paddy straws has been affected. These are valuable 
sources of domestic fuel. The number of cows and bullocks has declined. As a result, the supply 
of cow-dung, another important source of fuel has also dried up. About 56.67% of the households 
used cow dung as fuel before water logging but in 2010 it is 16.67% (Table 1). In 2010, 10% of 
the total households’ use straw but in 2000 and 2005 it was 33.33% and 16.67% respectively. 
About 6.67% of households use kerosene, gas as fuel in 2010 but in 2000 it was 0. The 66.67% 
household use wood in 2010 because any other source of fuel is decreasing for the effect of water 
logging. So the pressure on wood is increasing day by day and the diversity of trees has 
decreased in the study area now at present condition. 
 
 
 
 
 
595 
 
Table 1: Various environmental effects in different years 
 
Category 2000  
 
2005  2010  
Livelihood options Respondents 
(%) 
Respondents 
(%) 
Respondents 
 (%) 
Agricultural  
Agriculture labor 
Others day labor 
Van puller 
Small business 
Service  
Fishing  
Others  
Unemployed  
16.67 
40 
4.67 
5.33 
13.33 
2 
0 
10 
1.33 
14 
10 
16.67 
16.67 
12 
2.67 
3.33 
12 
4.67 
10 
10 
20 
16.67 
11.33 
2.67 
6 
8.67 
4.67 
Income level                                           Respondents                     Respondents                        Respondents 
TK/month                                                        (%)                                 (%)                                     (%)     
<1000 
1001-5000 
5001-7000 
7001-13000 
>13000 
3.33 
63.33 
20 
10 
3.33 
8.67 
68.67 
13.33 
6.67 
2.67 
20 
63.33 
9.33 
5.33 
2 
Main food items Respondents 
(%) 
Respondents 
(%) 
Respondents 
 (%) 
Rice 
Vegetables 
Fishes 
Eggs 
milk 
Others (muri, bread, gur, 
banana) 
53.33 
19.33 
10.00 
8.67 
4.67 
4 
34.00 
13.33 
33.33 
5.33 
2.67 
11.33 
23.33 
11.33 
43.33 
1.33 
.67 
20 
Fuel type Respondents 
(%) 
Respondents 
(%) 
Respondents 
 (%) 
Wood 
Straw 
Cow dung 
Others(Kerosene, gas) 
10.00 
33.33 
56.67 
0 
40.00 
16.67 
36.67 
6.67 
66.67 
10.00 
16.67 
6.67 
Types of disease Respondents 
(%) 
Respondents 
(%) 
Respondents 
 (%) 
Diarrhoea 
Skin diseases 
Chicken pox 
Typhoid or fever 
Viral eye diseases  
Others 
23.33 
12.00 
19.33 
30.00 
10.00 
5.33 
20.00 
33.33 
6.67 
33.33 
3.33 
3.33 
10.00 
63.33 
1.33 
20.67 
1.33 
3.33 
Water source Respondents 
(%) 
Respondents 
(%) 
Respondents 
 (%) 
Tube well 
Deep tube well 
Pond  
River  
50.00 
0 
25.50 
24.50 
25.00 
35.00 
35.00 
5.00 
20.00 
40.00 
35.00 
5.00 
 
 
 
596 
 
Sanitation condition   Respondents 
(%) 
Respondents 
(%) 
Respondents 
 (%) 
Hanging latrine 
Pit latrine 
Open tank latrine 
Septic tank latrine 
Open space latrine 
Others latrine 
10.00 
32.67 
20.67 
16.67 
9.33 
10.67 
20.00 
36.67 
17.33 
9.33 
6.00 
10.66 
23.33 
43.33 
13.33 
2.67 
6.67 
10.67 
 
3.2.6 Health condition 
Water logging carried out different types of diseases in the study area.  Public health situation in 
the study area has been deteriorating due to unhygienic condition caused by water logging. There 
has been a substantial increase in the incidence of various water borne diseases in the study area. 
In the year of 2010, 63.33% of the respondents in the affected area said that there has been an 
increased incidence of skin disease (Table 1) during and after water logging period. 
Typhoid/fever has been identified as the second most important disease by majority of the 
respondents in the affected area. For the lack of economic solvency the proper treatment cannot 
be done, so the people are suffering from these diseases for a long time. 
 
3. 2.7 Water source 
The surface water bodies of the study area become poisonous due to lack of circulation. The color 
of the water of the ponds, river has also changed and it smells foul. Table 1 represents that 40% 
people depend on deep tube well for their domestic purposes after water logging in 2010. But in 
2000 the used rate of deep tube well was 0%. In 2000 people used pond, river and tube well were 
25.50%, 24.50% and 50% respectively. Dependency decrease on tube well and river as a source 
of using water because most of the water body is mixed together and water becomes polluted. 
 
3.2.8 Sanitation condition 
Most of the households of water logged area use pit latrine and hanging latrine in present 
condition because different NGO’s provide sanitation materials to the water logged area. By 
those materials the people prepare pit latrine.  From (Table 1) it is obtained that the hanging 
latrine was 10% in 2000 but 2010 it is 23.33% because of the water logging condition. 13.33 % 
people use open space. Septic tank latrine was used by 16.67% people but in 2010 it is 2.67% 
because most of the septic latrine was destroyed due to water logging.  People’s income level 
decrease day by day, for this they cannot repair their latrine again. 
 
3.3 Adaptations in different sector 
 
Local communities (both indigenous and non-indigenous) have been facing common natural 
hazards of the area including floods, river erosion, droughts, salinity and cyclones for thousands 
of years. The local people developed many adaptation techniques, innovations and knowledge to 
address climatic vulnerability. 
 
3.3.1 Adaptation in livelihood pattern 
Most of the respondents of the study area are changed their occupational pattern due to water 
logging.  They want to increase their income from any kind of activities. For this they follow 
some alternative income source during water logging period. 
 
 
 
597 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3 Respondents adaptation in alternative income source 
 
Figure 3 shows 65% respondents are adapted in alternative income source to develop their 
economic conditions during water logging time. For this purpose they practice some adaptation 
strategies. These are follows:  
 
a) Adaptation in floating bed agriculture  
The floating agriculture practice is a good popular practice of the low-lying areas where lands 
remain submerged most of time in a year. In the winter season, farmers carry the floating bed 
comparatively in the high land and break the bed to mix with the soil of the land. As a result, 
water logging and flooding have been alarmingly increasing day by day. If Soil less agriculture 
which is called floating bed agriculture can disseminate to different part of Bangladesh then 
policy maker would change their attitude. In these connections, we need to change our terrestrial 
agriculture base approach. We have to consider about the resources of wetlands and need national 
management plan of it based on Soil-less agriculture (Ghosal and Haq, 2000).  
   The study area remains submerged with a long period, almost 7-8 months, in the year, 
especially in the monsoon season. People of this village largely depend on agriculture. People of 
this village largely depend on agriculture. For this reasons they have already adapted with 
floating bed agriculture.  
 
 
 
Figure 4 Respondents adaptation in floating bed agriculture 
 
Figure 4 shows that 30% households are fully involved (fully adapted) in floating bed agriculture 
and 35% are interested to involve in this sector but rest of the portion are not interested because 
they have poor knowledge about it and most of them are landless poor.  
 
 
 
 
 
598 
 
 
b) Adaptation in duck rearing 
Due to water logging most of the land area is submerged under water and it is rarely possible to 
maintain livestock in the study area. During this situation introduction of duck rearing provides 
an excellent initiative in the study area because ducks easily travel within water whereas 
livestock’s are not capable to do this. Mainly women are involved in this activity. 
 
 
 
Figure 5 Women’s adaptation in duck rearing 
 
Figure 5 shows that 80% women are adapted in duck rearing and only 20% are not. Most of the 
people in the study area are poor and they have little opportunity to earn money. The women of 
those families want to help their earning member by any means. So they (women) are adapted in 
this activity.  
 
c) Adaptation in hanging vegetable cultivation 
Farmers in Bangladesh are growing salt-resistant crops to deal with the growing short age of 
freshwater and also adapting HVG (Hanging Vegetable Gardening) in the waterlogged areas. So, 
for climate change adaptation strategy, action research on Hanging Vegetable Gardening (HVG) 
is urgently needed. 
 
 
 
Figure 6 Respondents adaptation in hanging vegetables cultivation 
 
Figure 6 shows that in 2000 no one involved in hanging vegetable cultivation because before 
2000 people in the study area were totally unfamiliar about water logging. But now around 6-7 
months household’s yards are covered by water. For this, they find out hanging vegetable 
gardening as alternative source of vegetable cultivation and this way they try to meet their needs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
599 
 
 
3.3.2 Adaptation in food habit change 
 
 
 
Figure 7 Adaptation in food habit due to water logging 
 
Figure 7 represents that the 73.33% household members agreed about their food habit change and 
only 26.67% respondents disagreed with the changing. These 26.67% households are higher 
income group and they are capable to maintain their previous food habit.  
 
3.3.3 Adaptation in water source 
People in the study area have already adapted with water source in the study area. 
 
 
 
                  Figure 8 Respondents adaptation    Figure 9 Alternative water sources  
                                    in water source                               in present conditions 
 
Figure 8 represents 90% respondents are adapted with water sector and 10% are not. People in 
the study area find out alternative water source for their drinking and domestic purposes. Figure 9 
shows 55% people use deep tube well and only 1% people use boiling water. 23% people 
consume rain water and among them some respondents told they use rain water mainly cooking 
and washing purposes. 
 
3.3.4 Adaptation in cooking pattern 
Major portion of population in the study area are poor. Their occupations mainly depend on 
agriculture. But due to water logging agricultural activities have about to stop.  Live stocks also 
decrease due to water logging. Their energy consumption pattern which was mainly depending 
on straw and cow dung was decrease due to water logging.  Some people use gas, kerosin as 
alternative energy source but they are fewer in number. For this reason, use of wood increase to 
prepare their meal. People also make improved efficient cooking stoves which are transferable 
from one place to another place during water logging season and wood is used in this stove. 
 
 
 
 
600 
 
 
 
Figure 10 Adaptation in alternative energy consumption stove 
 
Figure 10 shows that 75% respondents use improved efficient cooking stove and only 18.33% use 
general culli. They make improved efficient cooking stove to adapt with water logging because 
they can easily transfer it from one place to another place during water logging time.   
 
3.3.5 Adaptation in housing pattern 
Most of the people in the study area change their housing pattern due to water logging. They 
change their housing pattern because they need a safety shelter. 
 
 
 
Figure 11 Adaptation in housing pattern due to water logging 
 
Figure 11 represents that the 68.67% households have changed their housing condition for 
different causes but here water logging is the main cause. 31.33% households have not changed 
their housing condition. 
 
3.3.6 Adaptation in transportation 
Transport is an integral part of the functioning of the society. Main transportation system in the 
study area are bus, truck, van, cycle, motorcycle, nocimon (one kind of van) etc. The main 
communication system inundated under water within 6 to 7 months. Sometimes van and boat 
travel on the road mutually. During this time the main using mode is boat in village area. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
601 
 
3.4 Future potential adaptation strategies 
 
The south-west coastal region of Bangladesh is an active part of Ganges Delta formed by fine 
clay soil (Flubic) carried in by the upstream flows which are very fertile and rich in biological 
diversity. The livelihood of the people of this region is highly dependent on the natural resources. 
Agriculture and fisheries are important economic sectors employing a large portion of the 
population. Major Agricultural crops include rice, betel and vegetables, mustered and oil seed. 
But hundreds of thousands of people became unemployed as a result of the water logging, 
especially the poor and marginal. Some future potential adaptation strategies are mentioned here 
which will be effective for adaptation. 
 
 Alternative farming systems ,                               
  Enhance short duration crop varieties 
 Re-excavation of choked drainage canals,          
  Integrated poultry-fish farming 
 Duck-fish farming,                                                 
  Hanging vegetable cultivation 
 Case aquaculture etc. 
 
3.5 Potential trend of livelihood options in future 
 
South-West coastal region is mostly vulnerable to water logging. The people in this area always 
face horrific impacts of water logging. Yet, they find everyday few alternative options to survive 
with these horrific impacts of water logging. Respondents in the study area choice some future 
livelihood option as their capability. 
 
 
 
Figure 12 Respondents choice of livelihood option in future 
 
Figure 12 shows that 60% respondents are interested in floating bed agriculture. They have same 
opinion that they will earn more money from this farming. 
 
 
 
 
 
602 
 
 3.6 Organizations involved for adaptation 
 
Different organizations like GO, NGO (Uttaran, Asa, Setu, SUS etc.) are involved for adaptation 
in the study area. But most of the respondents in the study area told that mainly NGO’s had 
provided subsidy for their adaptation.  These NGO’s provide sanitation materials, construction 
materials of house, water purification filter, low interest loan etc. for their adaptation. 
 
3.7 Barriers in adaptation 
 
Adaptation is a process by which people minimize their existing effects in daily life. But there are 
many barriers in adaptation process. Some common barriers are mentioned bellow: 
a) Lack of Knowledge 
b) Lack of willingness 
c) Lack of co-operation between GO and NGO 
d) Lack of communication between sufferer and donor group 
e) Unavailability of subsidy 
f) Corruption etc. 
 
Conclusion 
 
The South-western regions of Bangladesh are more vulnerable to water logging. From the overall 
study it has been found that the social and economic conditions have changed due to the impact 
of water logging problems. The livelihood options have changed and its effect is going on the 
whole economy of the study area. But people in the study area have already adapted with 
different sectors like agriculture, sanitation, livelihood options, water source, energy consumption 
pattern, housing pattern, food habit etc. to minimize their existing problems and to maintain 
better livelihood pattern. 
 
Acknowledgement 
 
The authors are grateful to the officials of BWDB, LGED, Upazila Statistical Office of Tala 
Upazila, Union Parishad of Sarulia and Dhandia Union and respondents of Sarulia and Dhandia 
Union who spend their valuable time for me during data collection and provided useful 
information.  
 
 
References 
Ghosal, T. K. and Haq, A.H.M.R. (2000). Hydroponics-An Approach for Wetland 
 Management. In Waste  Recycling and Resource Management in the Developing  World: 
 Ecological Engineering  Approach (511-513). Edited by B. B. Jana, R. D. 
Mustafizur, R.; Saha, S.N. and Karim, R. (1995). Effect of Household Income and    
          Food Security in a Deeply Flooded Area in Bangladesh. Asia Pacific Journal of   
          Rural Development, Vol-v. CIRDAP press Dhaka, Bangladseh: 104-120p. 
Kothari, C.R. ( 2008). Research Methodology. 2nd edition, New Age International 
 Publishers,  India: 179p. 
Tutu, A. U. A. (2004). The Effect of Salinity in South-West Coastal Region of Bangladesh.   
Coastal Development Partnership (CDP), Khulna.  
 
 
603 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
AN INVESTIGATION ON GROUNDWATER LEVEL DEPLETION IN DHAKA  
 
 
Selina Jahan Sumi1, Shamsad Irin1 and Anika Yunus2 
 
 
Abstract: Groundwater level depletion is termed as long-term water-level declination which is 
caused by sustained pumping of groundwater. It is a key issue associated with groundwater use. 
Dhaka is one of the most densely populated cities in the world and is largely dependent on 
groundwater to meet up the demand for its rapidly growing population. About 90% municipal 
water supply comes from ground water storage whereas surface water contributes only 10% of 
the demand. Ground water is also used for irrigation and industrial purposes. It is observed that 
demand of water is increased from 150 mld to 2005 mld from the year 1963 to 2010. Future 
prediction says that demand of water will be 4990 mld by the year 2030 where the supply will 
always be less than the demand. This is because of the huge extraction of ground water for the 
increased population. Some probable causes of groundwater depletion are urbanisation and 
industrialisation, reduced rechargeable area by filling up the wetlands around Dhaka city. Water 
logging, pollution, localized land subsidence, saline water intrusion etc. are the hazards 
associated with these changes. Therefore our aim is to improve the present condition of Dhaka 
city by studying the rate of ground water depletion and help to find out suitable solution of 
recharge. Water level data of the selected tube wells upto the year 2010 are collected from the 
Dhaka Water Supply and Sewerage Authority (DWASA) and Bangladesh Water Development 
Board (BWDB). All the water levels have been measured with respect to Public Works 
Department (PWD) datum. Dhaka city has been divided into 10 Maintenance, Operation and 
Distribution Service (MODS) zones. Drawdown and specific capacity of these 10 zones are 
calculated from the pumping water level and static water level data. From the analysis it is found 
that among the 10 zones, maximum and minimum pumping water levels (PWL) are 92.43 m in 
zone-6 and 14 m in zone-9 respectively. Maximum and minimum specific capacities are 11.99 
l/s/m in zone-9 and 1.64 l/s/m in zone-4 respectively. Various charts are also produced to 
visualise the ground water level changes in different areas. From the investigation it is observed 
that ground water level is declining tremendously day by day. A balanced distribution of wells 
and suitable recharge techniques could be implemented to solve this problem. This study will 
help to find the suitable recharge procedure by providing the information on well discharge per 
year. It will also provide some future prediction about groundwater depletion based on past and 
present condition. The results of this study will help us to maintain the groundwater equilibrium 
                                                
1Undergraduate Students, Department of Water Resources Engineering, Bangladesh University of 
Engineering and Technology (BUET), Dhaka, Bangladesh;  
 2 Assistant Professor, Department of Water Resources Engineering, Bangladesh University of Engineering 
and Technology, Dhaka, Bangladesh; 88-0174-828-1251; anikawre@gmail.com 
 
 
 
604 
 
system, control groundwater depletion, protect against severe land subsidence and investigate 
underground movement of the water. 
 
Keywords: BWDB, Depletion, DWASA, Groundwater, MODS, Pumping Water Level, Specific 
Capacity. 
 
  
1. Introduction 
The world has developed tremendously in the 21st century. With the advancement of modern age 
industrialisation and urbanization has flourished out. The population has reached to an 
uncontrolled number. All these factors have influenced the use of ground water. The groundwater 
level has dropped by 6m in the last 7 years (The Daily Star, 25th October, 2011). This is 
obviously the result of excessive withdrawal of groundwater to meet the needs of about 15 
million city residents. Result of this huge depletion can be destructive for the city. This rapid rate 
of depletion can cause intrusion of southern saline water into the groundwater reservoir depriving 
the city dwellers from pure drinking water. 
Groundwater level has now dropped to 52 metres below mean sea level (MSL) which seems to be 
very dangerous for the coming future (The Daily Star, 25th October, 2011). The water table was 
51 metres below MSL in 2010 against 46 metres in 2004. Further it has fallen by 1 m in last one 
year. This data was obtained from one of the 255 auto water-level recorders across the country. In 
the past the underground vacuum of the Dhaka city used to be recharged by the water flowing 
from the North that means from the aquifer of Gazipur district and adjacent areas. At present, 
these areas are also suffering from severe depletion of groundwater level. Moreover it has been 
known that over the past 7 years the water table of Gazipur has dropped by 4 meters below MSL 
to 16 meters (The Daily Star, 25th October, 2011). The causes that have been identified for the 
depletion are excessive mining of groundwater for irrigation, industrialisation and household use. 
Now, Dhaka city gets its vacuum recharged by the water flowing from the South saline sea and in 
rainy season by rainwater. According to Mridha et al. (1996), 90 percent of pipelined water 
supply in the capital is from groundwater sources and only 10 percent from surface water 
treatment plants. Recently Dhaka WASA has set their target to draw water from the city's suburbs 
-- Singair in Manikganj and Bhakurta in Savar. This step would help Dhaka WASA to lift a daily 
300 million litres of water from the two well fields and save the city's Mirpur area from danger of 
groundwater over-pumping. Dhaka WASA has planned to increase the surface water generation 
to 70% from 10% and reduce the groundwater generation to 30% from 90% (The Daily Star, 25th 
October, 2011). The number of deep tube wells has been increased from less than 440 in 2004 to 
560 in recent times. Looking in another sector we will find that surface water treatment plant has 
remained static in only four. Moreover residential apartments and industrial units have installed 
deep tube wells to lift the ground water. This indicates how much increase in groundwater 
extraction has been caused due to increased number of deep tube wells. 
Some solutions have been suggested by various people researching on the water level condition 
in Dhaka (Daily News Monitoring Service, 23rd April, 2011). Probable solutions may be storage 
of rainwater in the upland watershed for releasing them in the stream in lean period. Thinking 
about the past condition it can be found that water shed Bhawal and Modhupur were covered 
with deep forest. Thus evaporation loss of received rainwater was minimum and storage was 
 
 
605 
 
maximum, release of stored water during dry months was maximum. This issue can be 
considered to evaluate the present situation of water level. 
It was revealed in a workshop held on 23 November 2004 in Dhaka that, the average groundwater 
level in Dhaka City was 11.3 m in 1970 and dropped to 50.60 m in 2004 (The Daily Star, October 
25, 2011). The solution to the ground water depletion in the capital is man-made canals to 
percolate the rain water into the ground. In recent years most of the ponds and canals in Dhaka 
city has been covered by concrete. The capital is caving in due to the weight of the concrete and 
mainly due to the underground vacuum created by inadequate recharging of the ground water. 
River water surrounding Dhaka is intensely polluted. To reduce the dependency on underground 
water we need to keep the rivers free from all kind of pollutions. Dhaka and adjoining area 
aquifers (water yielding layers) are confined aquifers. Because of excessive withdrawal of 
groundwater, pressure release will take place in the confined layers, and the clays above it would 
get compacted. Some years before, few areas near Sreepur Upazila of Gazipur District caved in 
due to excessive ground water abstraction. Such a scenario in Dhaka may be undesirable but not 
improbable. Categorical water restrictions and use of the right kind of technology for surface 
water in tandem with waste water cleaning up technology can be best solutions for this problem. 
The causes responsible for ground water level depletion can be stated as -increasing population, 
rapid urbanization, surface water pollution, changing weather pattern, construction work over 
recharge area huge amount of groundwater extraction compared to recharge (Todd, 1980) 
 
The most severe consequence of excessive groundwater pumping is lowering of groundwater 
table. As water must be pumped from a well that reaches below the water table, if groundwater 
levels decline too far the well owner have to deepen the well or drill a new well. As the water 
level declines, the yielding rate of water may decline too. As depth of water increases, more 
energy is required to lift the water. So, then using the well can become expensive. 
 
Necessity of investigating about the ground water level is to find a way to reduce the pressure on 
water storage, to prevent the  increased land subsidence which increases the frequency of flood, 
to prevent the drying up of production wells, estimate and solve reduction of water in streams and 
lakes to stop the deterioration of water quality, to maintain the groundwater equilibrium system, 
to control groundwater level fluctuation, to provide protection against severe land subsidence and 
investigating underground movement of the water. 
 
2.  Location of the study area 
Our study area includes the entire Dhaka. Dhaka city lies between latitudes 23º43' and 23º54' N 
and longitudes 90º20' and 90º30' E. It covers an area of about 260km2 and has the altitude of 6.5 
to 9m above mean sea level. Fig. 1 shows the well stations in Dhaka city. This figure shows the 
different well stations that are included in the investigation. 
 
 
606 
 
 
Figure 1: Digitized map of Dhaka City 
 
 
Figure 2 MODS zone maps of Dhaka City provided by DWASA 
Dhaka city is divided into 10 MODS zones. Our study includes the wells in the 10 MODS zones 
indicated by DWASA and also the wells in the stations set up by BWDB. Wells that are included 
in our study are Cantonment (Well ID-DH103), Dhamrai (Well ID-DH005,DH069,DH092), 
Dhanmondi (Well ID-DH124), Dohar (Well ID-DH095,DH-099), Keraniganj (Well ID-DH087), 
Lalbagh (Well ID-DH110), Mirpur (Well ID-DH015), Mohammadpur (Well ID-DH108,DH111), 
 
10 
04 
09 
05 08 
03
3
06 
01 
07 
02 
 
 
607 
 
Motijheel (Well ID-DH103S), Nawabganj (Well ID-DH065,DH088), Savar (Well ID-
DH073,DH-115), Sutrapur (Well ID-DH013), Sabujbagh (Well ID-DH112,DH-123). Fig. 2 
shows the 10 MODS zones of Dhaka indicated by numbers 1 to 10. 
At present the observed amount of water extraction is about 2 Mm3/day. Rechargable areas have 
been reduced due to filling up of the wetlands around Dhaka city. Present capacity of DWASA is 
about 1930 mld whereas present demand is 2005 mld. Fig 3 shows the demand and supply with 
the time. Less use of severely polluted surface water has increased the use of groundwater. Rapid 
urbanisation and industrialisation along with imbalanced recharge and abstraction rate have 
increased the intensity of the problem. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3: Groundwater demand and supply in Dhaka city from 1963 to 2005 
 
From the Fig 3, it can be said that in the year 1963 the demand and supply was in equilibrium 
which means the supply was sufficient to fulfil the total water demand. With passage of time the 
demand has increased to a greater rate than the supply. In 2005 the difference was so great that 
the supply was not sufficient to provide water to all according to their need.  
 
 
 
Figure 4: Increase in Demand with the population 
 
 
608 
 
Besides, in recent times the supply is so acute that some people don’t even get the minimum 
amount of water for their daily need. By the year 2030 demand will be approximately 4990 mld.  
If the present condition prevails then there will be total disruption in the water supply system in 
future. The cause for this huge demand is only the increased population. Migration from the rural 
areas to Dhaka city and the greater birth rate are the causes for this population increase. Fig 4 
shows how the demand of water has increased due to increase in population. Thus water level 
depletion has a direct relation with the increase in population. 
 
Table 1 shows the present demand of water and represents a future prediction of demand in the 
year 2030. This seems to be so dangerous that by 2030 the demand will be almost twice the 
supply of water. 
Table 1: Increasing Demand of Water In Dhaka  
 
Year 
 
Demand (mld) 
 
1963 150 
1998 1500 
2005 2100 
2030 Approximately 4990 
 
With the growth of population and land value the effect of uncontrolled groundwater extraction 
has become an economic burden and poses serious threat to well being of the citizens. 
Management of groundwater supply and extraction have become an essential requirement. To 
overcome the problem it has become necessary to find out the inherent causes considering its 
associated impacts on human life. Thus the study focuses on the prevailing condition of Dhaka 
city which will help to concern people to take steps for a better solution. Therefore the objectives 
of the study are: 
 
- To know the rate of ground water level depletion and identify the areas of maximum and 
minimum depletion 
-To find out the increase or decrease in the specific yield of the wells 
-To compare the water levels of different wells in different years 
 
2. Methods and Materials: 
 
The working procedure of the thesis work can be stated as follows: 
 
2.1 Data Collection: 
 
All the wells set up by DWASA and BWDB were chosen for the thesis work. Data of all those 
tube wells were collected from the DWASA and BWDB office. Water level data were collected 
for 20 years starting from 1991 to 2011. DWASA has divided the Dhaka City into 10 MODS 
Zones which are presented in Table 2. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
609 
 
Table 2: Dhaka City has been divided into the following Zones by DWASA (Badhan, 2011) 
 
MODS 
Zones 
Zone Area Boundary 
Zone-1 At the south, from Postagola to the West of Jatrabari Road, from Jatrabari Circles to 
the North of Demra Road and Boundary of  zone-1 towards the east –north and west 
Zone -2 At the east, from Nawabpur Road to Sadarghat, Hajaribag-Gajmahal is at the west, 
Azimpur is at the north, Waizghat-Sowarighat is at the south 
Zone-3 At the east, west of  New airport Road to Manipuripara, Gabtoli Beribadh is at the 
west,portion of shyamoli and kallyanpur Bridge is at the north and Nilkhet Crossing is 
at the south 
Zoone-4 Rokeya Sarani is at the east and the boundary of zone-4 towards the north, south and 
west 
Zone-5 Gulshan Lake is at the east, boundary of Kalachadpur is at the north and boundary of 
zone-5 towards the west and the south. 
Zone-6 Rampura-Banasri is at the east, Shahbag-kazi Nazrul Islam Avenue is at the west, 
Sonargaon-Panthapath is at the north and Bangabandhu Avenue is at the south. 
Zone-7 At the north, from Postagola to the east of Jatrabari road, from Jatrabari circles to the 
south of Demra road and Boundary of zone-1 towards the east, south and west. 
Zone-8 Nikunja, Boundary of Kuril is at the North, at the west, Gulshan Lake and the 
boundary of kalachadpur and boundary of zone-5 towards the east and the south 
Zone-9 At the south, Nikunja, Kuril, boundary of Puratoli and boundary of zone-5 towards the 
east and the west and the north 
Zone-10 Rokeya Sarani is at the west and boundary of zone-4 towards the north, south and east. 
 
2.2 Data Analysis 
 
DWASA office records the data of the wells they installed in various areas for the use of the 
public water requirement. Those daily data were for all the wells set up in various locations of 
each zones. Then the specific capacity and drawdown were calculated by using the data of 
pumping and static water level by following procedure.  
 
Yield = A in cusec  
Or, Yield = B in l/s 
Piezometric Height = C ft 
Static Water Level = D ft 
Pumping Water Level = E ft 
Drawdown = F = Pumping water level - Static water level = E - D ft   
 (1) 
Or, Drawdown = G= F/3.28 in m 
Specific Capacity = H = Yield/Drawdown = B/G    l/s/m     
 (2) 
Specific Drawdown = I = F/A ft/cusec       
 (3) 
 
 
 
610 
 
The data of water table, reduced level of parapet, parapet height etc. were collected from BWDB 
Office. Then groundwater level (GWL) was obtained by subtracting reduced level of parapet (RL 
Parapet) from ground water table (GWT) 
 
Thus, GWL = GWT- RL parapet         (4) 
 
 
 
Figure 5: Schematic diagram of ground water level and ground water table 
 
 
Fig 5 shows the reduced level of parapet, parapet height, ground water level and ground water 
table. The positive value of ground water level indicates that the water level is below mean sea 
level and negative value shows that the water level is above mean sea level. After plotting the 
data in tables different charts are produced to visualise the ground water level changes in various 
areas. Weekly data is then converted to yearly data. A comparison among the water level of 
different years is made. Besides, comparison of specific yield in various areas is also made. 
Depletion rate is calculated by subtracting the water level of successive years for the data of wells 
in various stations by the equation (5). 
 
Rate of 1990 = water level in January 1991- water level in January1990   
 (5) 
 
3. Results and discussions 
 
After completing the calculations, bar charts were produced to represent the various analyses of 
the zones regarding specific capacity and pumping water level. Fig 6 shows the maximum 
specific capacity of 10 zones, represents that zone 9 has the highest maximum specific capacity 
of 11.99 l/s/m covering the area of Uttara-12. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
611 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6 Maximum specific capacity of 10 MODS zones 
 
Fig 7 shows the maximum pumping water level in different zones. It is found that highest 
maximum pumping water level (PWL) is 92.43 m in zone-6 covering the area of Khilgaon C-
Block. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                          Figure 7 Maximum Pumping Water Level of 10 MODS zones 
 
 
 
 
612 
 
Fig 8 presents the highest minimum and the lowest minimum specific capacity of different zones. 
It is found that highest minimum is 1.64 l/s/m in zone-4.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8 Minimum Specific Capacity of 10 MODS zones 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
Figure 9 Minimum Pumping Water Level of 10 MODS zones 
 
 
 
 
613 
 
Various charts are also produced to visualise the ground water level changes in different areas. 
From the investigation it is observed that ground water level is declining at huge rate where 
population and industries are at higher numbers. Fig 9 shows minimum pumping water level in 
different zones represent that the highest minimum value is 14 m in zone-9 covering the area of 
Uttara-2. So it has higher specific capacity and the water level is not much declined. Moreover 
the drawdown is less than the other areas. 
 
Fig 10 presents the water level condition from 1991 to 2011 in various wells in central part of 
Dhaka. In the figure, different colour indicates the water level for different well stations. Blue 
colored line is for Dhanmondi area which shows the highest depletion in water level. Lowest 
depletion is observed in Mohammadpur. The figure shows that the water level is declining at a 
high rate in the central part specially in Dhanmondi and Mirpur. Some of the reasons are huge 
number of industries and offices in those areas. Moreover sometimes the wells set up by 
DWASA abstracts water in nearby areas of the test wells of BWDB. As a result the water level in 
BWDB wells go down tremendously because of the abstraction by WASA wells. In Dhanmondi 
the declining rate is high as there are almost 250 tanneries which have 2-3 wells of their own. 
They use those wells to extract water for their use. So the test well of BWDB will get no water in 
the deepest point of ground. 
 
In the areas nearby Dhaka the water level depletion is less than central part. This is because the 
population is less and also there is less number of shopping malls and industries. When we will 
look through figure-11 we will observe the fact. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Figure 10 Water Level in Different wells (old ID) in central part Dhaka(1991-2011) 
 
 
614 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                       Figure 11 Water level in wells (old ID) outer side of Central Dhaka 
 
 
 
The rate of water level depletion in various wells is calculated to show how tremendously level 
depletion is increasing and presented in table 3.The negative value in the table indicated decrease 
in rate of depletion and positive value indicates increase in rate of depletion. Mostly the rate 
increased with the time. But in some cases exceptions were observed. Rate of depletion has been 
obtained from 1991 to 2010. In the year 2011 the rate could not be calculated because after June 
2011 data was not available. Rate is calculated by subtracting water level of 1st week of January 
of two consecutive years. After 2012 January the rate for 2011 can be estimated. Some 
exceptions in some wells may be due to some missing data or due to resink of wells at a different 
place of different elevation. If a well is resink at a different place keeping the same reduced level 
of parapet then the data obtained before resink and after resink will not give identical result. This 
is because there may be difference in elevation of the ground before and after resink, while the 
RL parapet is the same. These problems were observed for the wells in Cantonment. It is known 
that in the Cantonment, the test well was resink in 2005. So we found in our data that the water 
level go upside instead of downside after 2005 as the well was set up in a high elevation ground. 
Besides it has also been known that the well was out of order for some time before resinking 
which hampered the regular data recording interval of 1 week. The missing data created 
breakpoints in the graph.  
 
Table 3: Depletion rate in wells inside and surrounding Dhaka 
 
Wel
l ID 
GT 
26080
01 
GT  
26420
09 
GT 
26500
12 
GT 
26160
05 
GT 
2648
010 
GT 
26140
02 
GT 
26180
06 
GT 
26380
08 
Stati Canto Lalbag Moha Dhan Mirp Dhamr Dohar Keran
 
 
615 
 
on nment h mmad
pur 
mondi ur ai iganj 
Yea
r Rate rate rate rate  rate Rate rate 
199
0  -0.65 -0.5 -16.65 0.44 -0.27 0.48 0.07 
199
1 0.59 0.39 0.05 2.29 -1.4 -1.36 -1.82 0.21 
199
2 -3.18 -2.39 -1.19 -5.49 -1.59 -1.5 1.78 -0.71 
199
3 -0.59 -2.26 -0.65 0.18 -1.43 0.48 -0.18 0.35 
199
4 -2.59 -0.43 -1.21 -1.91 -1.43 -0.35 -0.2 -0.48 
199
5 -1.52 1.47 -0.3 -2.56 -1.58 0.55 0.55 0.48 
199
6 -1.4 -1.94 0.49 -2.24 -2.57 -0.11 -0.2 -0.1 
199
7 -1.72 -1.27 -1.99 -2.67 -2.9 -0.48 -0.55 -0.21 
199
8 -1.83  -0.65 -2.4 -2.03 -0.49 2.15 0.31 
199
9 -2.16  -1.85 -3 -3.63 1.83 -0.7 -3.18 
200
0 -2.78  -2.03 -2.42  -2.46 -1.05  
200
1 -3.62 -5.12 -1.52 -1.61  -0.67 -0.62  
200
2 -3.94 -2.12 -0.82 -10.74  1 0.12  
200
3 -3.3 -1.5 -2.2 -1.68 -6.62 0.69 0.1 0.1 
200
4  -1.62  -2.17 -6.18 0.21 -0.9 0.47 
200
5  0.59  -5.62 -5.25 -0.33 0.6 -1.72 
200
6  3.36  -2.48 -1.29 0.43 -1.4 -1.45 
200
7   -0.45 6.55 -2.06 0.18 1.77 0.19 
200
8 0.45  0.45 1.71 2.88 0.14 -0.82 1.89 
200
9 0.05  -1 -2.13 -0.16 -0.77 0.15 0.35 
201
0 0.7  0.02 -0.12 1.03 0.7 0.42 -1.84 
 
 
 
616 
 
4. Conclusion 
 
The aim of the study is to improve the present condition of Dhaka city by studying the rate of 
ground water depletion and help to find out suitable solution of recharge. Water level data of the 
selected tube wells upto the year 2010 are collected from DWASA and BWDB. Dhaka city has 
been divided into 10 MODS zones. Drawdown and specific capacity of these 10 zones are 
calculated from the pumping water level and static water level data. From the analysis it is found 
that among the 10 zones, maximum and minimum pumping water levels (PWL) are 92.43 m in 
zone-6 and 14 m in zone-9 respectively. Maximum and minimum specific capacities are 11.99 
l/s/m in zone-9 and 1.64 l/s/m in zone-4 respectively. From the investigation it is observed that 
ground water level is declining tremendously day by day. A balanced distribution of wells and 
suitable recharge techniques could be implemented to solve this problem. This study will help to 
find the suitable recharge procedure by providing the information on well discharge per year. The 
results of this study will also help us to maintain the groundwater equilibrium system, control 
groundwater depletion, protect against severe land subsidence and investigate underground 
movement of the water. 
 
 
References   
 
Badhan, M. A. (2011) Assessment of Water Supply Network of Dhaka Metropolitan Area. 
 
Daily News Monitoring Service, Groundwater Level Jumped Down Radically In Dhaka, News 
From Bangladesh, April 23, 2011. 
 
Mridha, M. A. K., Rashid, M. H. and Talukder, K. H. (1996) Quality of groundwater for 
irrigation in Nitore District, Bangladesh. J. Agric. Res., 21: 15-30. 
 
Todd, D.K. (1980) Groundwater Hydrology, Second Edition 
 
 
617 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
ASSESSMENT OF GROUNDWATER QUALITY OF DHAKA 
 
 
Shamsad Irin1, Selina Jahan  Sumi1 and  Anika Yunus2 
 
 
ABSTRACT: Water quality analysis is the most important aspect in groundwater studies. 
Physio-chemical analysis reveals whether the water is suitable for drinking, irrigation and 
industrial purposes. Dhaka is one of the most densely populated cities which depend on 
groundwater. Since 1971 Dhaka is growing rapidly in terms of area and population. Due to heavy 
extraction of groundwater, dispose of industrial waste, municipal waste, infiltration of polluted 
surface water in shallow aquifer, groundwater quality is changing and degrading day by day. 
About 90% municipal water supply comes from ground water storage whereas surface water 
contributes only 10% of the demand. So groundwater quality assessment is essential. The 
physical and chemical parameters of groundwater play a significant role in classifying and 
assessing groundwater quality. Therefore our aim is to represent the present scenario of Dhaka by 
studying the changes in groundwater quality parameters and compare it with the standard value. 
Groundwater quality data have been collected from Bangladesh Water Development Board 
(BWDB). Analyses of these data show that Hydrogen Ion Concentration (pH), Total Dissolved 
Solid (TDS), Total Hardness as CaCO3, Manganese (Mn), Arsenic (As), Chloride (Cl),Fluoride 
(F) of groundwater in Dhaka are within the permissible limit according to WHO guideline and 
Bangladesh Standard. But Color, Turbidity, Iron (Fe) of groundwater are above the standard 
value. Correlation equations have been developed among different water quality parameters. 
From the value of Correlation Coefficient R, it can be said that the correlation among Hardness 
and Cl, TDS and Cl, TDS and Hardness are excellent. Water quality parameters have also been 
analyzed for evaluating irrigation quality by calculating Sodium Absorption Ratio (SAR). It is 
observed that the groundwater of Dhaka falls into C1-S1 category. From the analyses, it is hoped 
that this study will be of immense help for the groundwater quality development and would serve 
as a guide for taking necessary measures for improving the water quality and availability to 
people. Furthermore this study will help us to predict the groundwater quality based on these 
correlation equations which can be used for any other location. 
Keywords: BWDB, Correlation, Groundwater, Hardness, Quality, SAR, WHO 
 
1.  Introduction 
Water quality is one of the most important aspects in groundwater studies. Groundwater quality 
issue gets more importance due to rapid increase of population, rapid industrialization, and flow 
                                                        
1Undergraduate Students, Department of Water Resources Engineering, Bangladesh University of 
Engineering and Technology (BUET), Dhaka, Bangladesh; 
 2Assistant Professor, Department of Water Resources Engineering, Bangladesh University of Engineering 
and Technology, Dhaka, Bangladesh; 88-0174-828-1251; anikawre@gmail.com 
618 
 
of pollution from surface water through infiltration and much use of fertilizer and pesticides in 
agriculture. 
   Groundwater generally contains Fe, Ca, Mg, Silica, arsenic, phosphate, chloride in dissolve 
state the presence of which above certain limits also affect the body system. Irrigation water 
quality is related to its effect on soil and crops and its management. The chemical constituents of 
irrigation water can affect plant growth directly through toxicity or deficiency or indirectly by 
altering plant availability of nutrients.  
   In Bangladesh, water extracted from shallow aquifer is the primary source of drinking and 
cooking for most of its population of over 150 million. Not only the rural supply but also the 
urban water supply heavily depends on groundwater. According to Mridha et al. (1996) about 
70% of irrigation water and around 83% of supply water are supplied by groundwater. 
Shahidullah et al. (2000) attempted to asses the groundwater quality in a selected area of 
Bangladesh. Their results suggested that there was neither salinity nor toxicity problem of 
irrigation water, so that groundwater can safely be used for long-term irrigation. In other study, 
Quddus and Zaman (1996) showed irrigation water quality in some selected areas of Bangladesh. 
All the research so far completed on groundwater quality of different areas of Bangladesh is 
based on physicochemical analyses. A few numbers of studies are available regarding the 
analysis of groundwater quality data using regression techniques for prediction purposes in 
different areas of India (Rao and Rao, 1994; Jain and Sharma, 2000). Joarder et al. (2008) studied 
groundwater quality of Sunamganj district, Bangladesh using regression techniques. No attempt 
has yet been made to predict groundwater quality of Dhaka district using this regression 
technique. The developed regression equations for the parameters having significant correlation 
coefficients can be successfully used to estimate the concentration of other parameters. In the 
present study an attempt has been made to study groundwater quality of Dhaka district and to 
find correlation among different quality parameters. Therefore the objectives of the study are  
 
1. To compare the current values of quality parameters with the drinking and irrigation water 
standard (both WHO guideline and Bangladesh standard) 
2. To find correlations between different parameters by identifying correlation coefficient and 
correlation equation. 
3. To find maximum, minimum, mean, standard deviation, skewness, kurtosis for ground water 
quality parameters. 
4.  To identify the areas where the risk of groundwater contamination is high by graphical 
analysis of ground water quality parameters. 
 
2.  Study area 
 
Dhaka is the capital of Bangladesh resting on the eastern banks of the Buriganga River which 
flows from the Turag River. Fig. 1 shows the study area. The district consists of 5 upazilas, 21 
thanas, 3 municipalities, 77 union parishads, 1020 mouzas and 1863 villages. Dhaka city is the 
centre of Bangladesh which occupies only one fifth of the area of Dhaka district. This city lies 
between latitudes 23º43' and 23º54' N and longitudes 90º20' and 90º30' E. Dhaka city has five 
upazillas, seven principal thanas and fourteen auxiliary thanas. Its area is 1463.60 square 
kilometers. This District is bordered with Gazipur and Tangail to the north, Munshiganj and 
Rajbari to the south, Narayanganj to the east and Manikganj to the west. Annual average 
temperature of the district is maximum 34.5°C and minimum 11.5°C. Average annual rainfall is 
1931mm. 
619 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Location of study area (Dhaka) 
 
2. Materials & Methods 
 
2.1 Data Collection  
 
All data have been collected from the BWDB (Bangladesh Water Development Board) office. 
Table 1 shows the different areas for which groundwater data have been collected. 
 
Table 1 Location of collected groundwater sample 
 
Name of the locations 
Paribagh 770-800ft 
Kurzon Hal l(140-149 m) 
Shahidullah Hall (264-280 m) 
Purbachal, Rupganj (840-860 ft) 
Kamta, Purbachal (800-820ft) 
Gazipur (360 ft sample) 
Gazipur (500ft sample) 
Uttara 345-375ft 
Boardbazar 370-400ft  
Bypile 345-375ft 
Keraniganj 400-430ft 
   
620 
 
2.2 Data Analysis 
 
Table 2 shows the standard values of water quality parameters according to WHO (World Health 
Organization) guideline and Bangladesh Standard to compare the collected groundwater sample 
with the standard value. 
 
Table 2: The standard values of water quality parameters according to WHO (World Health 
Organization) guideline and Bangladesh Standard. 
 
Parameters Unit 
WHO 
Guideline, 
1996 
Bangladesh Standard for 
Drinking Water 
pH - 6.5-8.5 6.5-8.5 
EC μS/cm   
Carbon dioxide, CO2 mg/l - - 
TDS mg/l 1000 1000 
Color (Filtered) Pt.Co.Unit 15 15 
Turbidity NTU 5 10 
Total Alkalinity as 
CaCO3 
mg/l - - 
Total Hardness as CaCO3 mg/l 500 200-500 
Iron, Fe mg/l 0.3 0.3-1.0 
Manganese, Mn mg/l 0.5 0.1 
Arsenic, As mg/l 10 50 
Lead, Pb mg/l 0.01 0.05 
Calcium, Ca mg/l  75 
Magnesium, Mg mg/l  30-35 
Sodium, Na mg/l 200 200 
Potassium, K mg/l  12 
Chloride, Cl mg/l 250 150-600 
Fluoride, F mg/l 1.5 1 
Phosphate, PO4 mg/l  6 
Sulphate, SO4 mg/l 250 400 
Nitrate-Nitrogen, NO3-N mg/l 50 10 
Ammonia-Nitrogen, 
NH3-N 
mg/l 0.2 0.5 
Total Coliform #/100ml 00/100ml 00/100ml 
Fecal Coliform #/100ml 00/100ml 00/100ml 
 
For the data of quality parameters in various Upazilas, mean, standard deviation, skewness and 
kurtosis have been calculated by using following equations: 
                                  (1) 
                            (2) 
621 
 
Pierson’s co-efficient of skewness = (mean-mode)/standard deviation     (3) 
In our study we have applied linear regression analysis to develop a correlation equation and 
correlation coefficient among different water quality parameters. Values of the correlation 
coefficient are always between -1 and +1. A correlation coefficient of +1 indicates that two 
variables are perfectly related in a positive linear sense, a correlation coefficient of -1 indicates 
that two variables are perfectly related in a negative linear sense, and a correlation coefficient of 
0 indicates that there is no linear relationship between the two variables.  
 
3. Results and Discussion 
 
Table 3 presents 30 year (1980 to 2010) groundwater quality data for the well (ID GQ2650102) 
of Mohammadpur upazila in Dhaka district.   
 
Table 3: Analysis of groundwater quality for the well (ID GQ2650102) of Mohammadpur upozila 
in Dhaka district for 30 years (1980 to 2010) 
 OldID District Upazila WellID   
 DHWQ102 Dhaka Mohammadpur GQ2650102   
Parameter Maximum Minimum Mean Std.Deviation Skewness Kurtosis 
pH 10 6.31 7.21 1.02 1.74 2.78 
EC 225 ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- 
TDS 650 15 226.97 143.94 1.93 5.94 
Calcium 50 6.1 32.06 16.96 -0.14 -1.74 
Magnesium 50.4 4.9 14.65 11.29 2.997 10.099 
Sodium 130 1.3 29.63 37.39 1.51 2.01 
Potassium 25 2.05 6.29 7.23 2.36 5.62 
Chloride 104 2 16.46 24.23 3.52 13.3 
Carbonate 120 3.52 61.76 82.36 ----- ---- 
BiCarbonate 225 76 156.32 57.38 0.49 -1.32 
Sulphate 93.1 1 16.83 30.31 2.03 3.27 
Nitrate 3 0.2 1.11 0.68 1.64 4.06 
Iron 13.7 0.02 2.57 4.11 1.93 3.81 
Manganese 0.87 0.023 0.27 0.399 1.95 3.85 
Boron 2.9 0.011 1.3 1.23 0.65 0.29 
Silica 66.7 1.11 41.28 18.04 -0.75 0.5 
Arsenic 7.54 ----- ----- ----- ----- ---- 
Fluoride 2.2 0.1 0.37 0.65 3.05 9.46 
Iodide 0.01 ----- ----- ----- ----- ----- 
CarbonDioxide 150 1 51.66 42.77 0.76 0.37 
 
622 
 
Hydrogen Ion Concentration (pH ), Electric Conductivity (EC), Carbon Dioxide (CO2), Total 
Dissolved Solid (TDS), Color (Filtered), Turbidity, Total Alkalinity As CaCO3,Total Hardness As 
CaCO3, Iron (Fe), Manganese (Mn), Arsenic (As), Lead (Pb) Calcium (Ca), Magnesium (Mg), 
Sodium (Na) Potassium (K), Chloride (Cl), Fluoride (F), Phosphate (PO4), Sulphate (SO4), 
Nitrate-Nitrogen (NO3-N), Ammonia Nitrogen (NH3-N), Total Coliform, Fecal Coliform are the 
groundwater quality parameters used in this study. Table 3 shows the analysis of groundwater 
quality for the well (ID GQ2650102) of Mohammadpur upazila in Dhaka district for 30 years. 
The green coloured values indicate that the parameters are within the standard range. The orange 
coloured values represent those which are above the standard value. Pink colour indicates 
negative value of skewness and curtosis. From the analysis it is found that the water quality in 
Mohammadpur upazila is slightly acidic, most of the water quality parameters are within the 
range except iron, which is above the range. The skewness values for calcium and silica are 
negative, the kurtosis values for calcium and sulphate are also negative. The Sodium Absorption 
Ration (SAR) has also been calculated for Dhaka city and found 6.13 and the value of EC is 225. 
So Dhaka is in S1-C1 category. This result suggests that there is no salinity problem of irrigation 
water, so that groundwater can safely be used for long-term irrigation. 
 
 
 
623 
 
   Table 4 presents correlation coefficient among different water quality parameters for the 
collected groundwater sample of Table 1. The correlation equation helps to find the certain water 
quality parameter of a sample if other parameter is known and the process is quite time 
consuming. 
   The green value indicates that the correlation coefficient, R > 0.8, which means excellent 
correlation. The yellow value indicates that the correlation coefficient, R > 0.6 which means quite 
good correlation. The blue value indicates that the correlation coefficient, R > 0.4 which means 
poor correlation. From the value of R, it can be said that the correlation among Hardness & Cl, 
TDS and Cl, TDS &Hardness is excellent. Table 5 and Table 6 present correlation equations 
among water quality parameters for the collected groundwater sample of Table 1. 
 
Table 6: Correlation equations among water quality parameters 
 
 
624 
 
Fig. 2 and Fig. 3 show comparison among these water quality parameters with standard value by 
bar chart for various locations. From these charts, it was found that the values of pH, TDS, 
Hardness, Mn, As, Cl, F are within the standard range in all samples. But the values of color in 
Shahidullah Hall, Purbachal, Gazipur, Uttara are greater than the standard value. The value of 
turbidity in Gazipur and the value of iron in Purbachal are also above the standard value. 
Moreover, maximum value of water quality parameters among the samples is also identified from 
these charts. This will help us to identify the areas where the risk of groundwater contamination 
is high. Such as TDS is maximum in Keraniganj, pH is maximum in both Jagannath Hall and 
Kurzon Hall, Color and Tubidity is maximum in Gazipur, CO2 is maximum in Purbachal, 
Alkalinity is maximum in Boardbazar, Hardness is maximum in Keraniganj, Fe is maximum in 
Purbachal, Mn is maximum in Kurzon Hall, As is maximum in Jagannath Hall, Cl is maximum in 
Keraniganj, F is maximum in Purbachal and NO3-N is maximum in Kurzon Hall. 
 
 
 
625 
 
 
Figure 2: Comparison of water quality parameters among various locations 
 
    
  
626 
 
 
 
Figure 3 Comparison of water quality parameters among various locations 
Arsenic had been a great threat for drinking water for a few years ago. At that time several skin 
diseases and other internal diseases were caused by Arsenic. But in recent times Arsenic 
contamination is not a severe problem due to the remedy taken before by Government. That is 
why concentration of Arsenic is very low in different areas of Dhaka as shown in Fig. 4. 
 
Fig. 4 Comparison of Arsenic concentration in various locations 
 
4. Conclusion 
 
Ground water quality is deteriorating day by day. The water quality parameter differs in 
concentration in various areas. Some parameters have good correlation among them while some 
627 
 
others have no inter relation between them. Hardness of water has an excellent correlation (0.97) 
with TDS. This means increasing amount of TDS will increase the hardness of water. So if we 
want to keep the water in a safe condition we have to control the quality parameters. One quality 
parameter can enhance the presence of another. This study will help to identify the risky areas of 
Dhaka where various parameters are present at an amount higher than the standard value. 
Besides, the vulnerable areas should be taken care of to reduce the concentrations. Our study will 
also create awareness among people to take necessary steps for the supply of pure drinking water. 
 
References 
 
Jain, C. K. and Sharma, M. K. (2000) Regression analysis of groundwater quality data of Sagar 
Madhya Pradesh. Indian J. Environ. Health. 42(4): 159-168.  
Joarder, M.A.M., Raihan, F., Alam, J.B. and Hasanuzzaman, S. (2008) Regression Analysis of 
Ground Water Quality Data of Sunamganj District ,Bangladesh. Int. J. Environ. Res., 2 (3): 291-
296. 
Mridha, M. A. K., Rashid, M. H. and Talukder, K. H. (1996) Quality of groundwater for 
irrigation in Nitore District, Bangladesh. J. Agric. Res., 21: 15-30. 
Quddus, K. G. and Zaman, M. W. (1996) Irrigation water quality in some selected villages of 
Meherpur in Bangladesh. J. Agric. Res.,23(2): 51-57. 
Rao, K. S. and Ro, B. S. (1994) Correlations among water quality parameters of groundwater of 
Musunur Mandal, Krishna District. Indian J. Environ. Protect.,14(7): 528-532. 
Shahidullah, S. M., Hakim, M. A., Alam, M. S. and Shamsuddoha, A. T. M. (2000) Assessment 
of a groundwater quality in a selected area of Bangladesh. Pakistan J. Bio. Sci., 3 (2): 246-249. 
628 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM IN THE ARSENIC AFFECTED AREA: POLICY AND 
INSTITUTIONAL DISTRIBUTION  
 
 
M Aminul Haque1  
 
 
ABSTRACT: The Government of Bangladesh has made significant commitments for the 
improvement of drinking water supply for the people of Bangladesh. These commitments reflect 
the policy documents related to water supply and sanitation, which include National Policy for 
Safe Drinking Water and Sanitation 1998, National Water Policy 1999, National Policy for 
Arsenic Mitigation 2004, Coastal Zone Policy 2005 and Millennium Development Goal etc. The 
paper discusses present policies of drinking water supply and the activities of major organizations 
involved in water supply sector. Department of Public Health Engineering (DPHE) under Local 
Government Division (LGD) is responsible for the installation of water supply system in rural 
areas and in urban areas outside Dhaka and Chittagong city. The paper also highlighted water 
supply strategy and the existing applied technologies on water supply in arsenic affected areas. It 
has been found that the policies have emphasized to safe and affordable drinking water supplies 
through various means including rainwater harvesting and conservation. But ‘Groundwater Act’ 
should be enacted to control activities regarding sustainable groundwater exploration, 
development and management whilst the Groundwater Management Ordinance 1985 is currently 
in suspension and should be repealed. The Arsenic Mitigation Policy gives preference to use of 
surface water over groundwater. Arsenic contamination of shallow aquifer in Bangladesh is an 
unprecedented water quality catastrophe in the recent history. High levels of arsenic (As > 0.05 
mg/l, Bangladesh Standard - 0.05 mg/l) have been detected in 61 out of 64 administrative 
districts; the southern, southwestern and northeastern regions of the country are the worst 
affected. The numbers at risk are estimated to be about 35 million population above 0.05 mg/l 
and about 54 million above 0.01 mg/l (Arsenic level). It is also estimated that 27% of the shallow 
tubewells in the country, spread over 268 Upazilas are contaminated with arsenic above 
Bangladesh standard of 0.05mg/L as drinking water quality. In fact, arsenic contamination has 
become a serious problem in 16 districts of the country affecting 15 million people. The severity 
of arsenic contamination necessitates restricted use of groundwater and a move to alternative 
water sources for drinking water supply such as ponds, lakes, canals and rivers. But uncertainty 
on availability of water, global climate change and sensitivity of the trans-boundary river issues 
are the major threats to water resources development. Competent water resources management 
could play a key role to solve the arsenic contamination problem in ensuring the supply of safe 
drinking water. Besides shallow tube well technology, rainwater-harvesting system is the most 
appropriate solution to provide safe drinking water in the arsenic affected areas. 
 
                                                
1Principal Scientific Officer, Water Resources Planning Organization, Banani, Dhaka 
 
629 
 
1.   Introduction 
 
One of the great challenges of Bangladesh is to ensure safe, sweet, drinkable, potable water 
supply throughout the country particularly to the disadvantaged and the poor communities. In 
particular the rural people greatly suffer from unavailability of pure drinking water. The common 
factors which affect safe water supply are natural calamity, environmental degradation, arsenic 
invasion in groundwater, saline intrusion both in surface and groundwater in coastal belt, rise of 
sea level, tidal surge, water-logging, improper solid waste management, declination of 
groundwater, drought, flood, surface water pollution and so on. The groundwater constitutes the 
major source of drinking water in the country but arsenic contamination has threatened the safe 
water supply. The arsenic contamination of Bangladesh’s groundwater with its genesis and toxic 
effects on humans has already been reported (Dhar et al. 1997, Karim et al. 1997, Nickson et al. 
1998, Ahmed 2000, Karim 2000). 
   Surface water is abundant in the wet season in Bangladesh. An estimated 795,000 million cubic 
meters of surface water is discharged through the Ganges-Brahmaputra system. There are another 
290 rivers discharging surface water into the Bay of Bengal. Each year about one-third of 
Bangladesh is submerged in a normal flood. In the dry season water scarcity persists in many 
areas. During this period, surface water availability is limited.  Salinity intrusion is a great 
concern. Global climate change is a major area of uncertainty posing threats to water resources 
development. For the last 50 years, Bangladesh is negotiating with India for River Water Sharing. 
Out of the 54 common rivers with India, Bangladesh has only treaty on sharing of Ganges water 
that was signed in 1996.  
   Groundwater is the most important source of water supply in Bangladesh. In the coastal belt, 
high salinity in surface and groundwater and in the hilly areas absence of good aquifers as well as 
difficulties in tube well construction in stony layers are the main constraints for the development 
of water supply systems. Due to the detection of Arsenic, the quantum of usable groundwater has 
reduced to a greater extent necessitating massive engineering interventions, and huge investments 
in rural water supply systems. Arsenic contamination of groundwater in shallow aquifers has 
prompted the Government to adopt a “National Policy for Arsenic Mitigation 2004 and 
Implementation Plan for Arsenic Mitigation in Bangladesh” to mitigate the effects of arsenic on 
the people and the environment in a holistic and sustainable way. This paper would enable to 
reveal the severity of arsenic contamination; highlights the present technology for safe water; 
discuss the water supply related policies for the country and recommends means of safe water 
supply in arsenic affected area in Bangladesh.  
 
 
2. Arsenic Affected Area 
 
Groundwater is severely contaminated with arsenic above the maximum permissible limit of 0.05 
mg/l for drinking water. Arsenic concentrations in about half of the 400 measurements taken in 
1996 were above the maximum permissible limit (Smith et al. 2000). In 1998, British Geological 
Survey (BGS) collected 2,022 tube-well water samples from 41 arsenic affected districts (Smith 
et al. 2000). Laboratory tests revealed that 35% of these water samples had arsenic concentrations 
above 0.05 mg/l. Moreover, School of Environmental Studies (SOES), Jadavpur University, India 
and Dhaka Community Hospital (DCH), Bangladesh had jointly analyzed 22,003 tube-well water 
samples collected from 64 districts of Bangladesh between August 1995 and February 2000 
(SOES and DCH 2000). Five years of sampling indicated that arsenic concentration in 
630 
 
groundwater was above 0.01 mg/l in 54 districts and above 0.05 mg/l in 47 districts. Furthermore, 
a study of World Bank reports, "with more than an estimated 20 million of its 126 million people 
assumed to be drinking contaminated water and another 70 million potentially at risk. Bangladesh 
is facing what has been described as perhaps the largest mass poisoning in history. High 
concentrations of naturally occurring arsenic have already been found in water from thousands of 
tube-wells, the main source of potable water, in 59 out of Bangladesh's 64 districts" (World Bank 
2000). The contemporary statistics given in Table 1 reveal the severity of arsenic contamination 
in Bangladesh. In fact, arsenic contamination has become a serious problem in 16 districts of the 
country affecting 15 million people. Since 95% of the population of Bangladesh is drinking 
groundwater, arsenic contamination has evolved into a serious health hazard. Arsenic is 
accumulating in humans through the intake of arsenic contaminated drinking water. 
 
Table 1. Current arsenic calamity in Bangladesh 
 
Description Unit 
Total number of districts in Bangladesh 64 
Number of districts surveyed for arsenic contamination 61 
Number of districts having arsenic above 0.05 mg/l in groundwater 59 
Total area of Bangladesh 147,570 km2 
Area of affected 59 districts 126,134 km2 
Total population of Bangladesh 129 million 
Population at risk 70 million 
Population potentially exposed 30 million 
Number of patients suffering from arsenicosis 38,118 
WHO arsenic drinking water standard 0.01 mg/l 
Bangladesh arsenic drinking water standard 0.05 mg/l 
Total number of shallow tube-wells in Bangladesh 9.2 million 
Total number of affected shallow tube-wells 4.2 million 
(Source: Begum and Karim 2000, World Bank 2000, Safiuddin and Karim 2001, Meng et al. 
2001) 
 
The water supply coverage has increased in both urban and rural areas. Nearly 96% of the rural 
population is served by over a million hand tube wells. It has been found that the tube well water 
samples from 61 districts out of 64 districts of the country were tested for arsenic poisoning. In 
59 districts the arsenic content exceeded 0.05 mg/L and 70.9 million people are at risk of arsenic 
poisoning. Presence of higher arsenic contents than the safe limit set for drinking purpose causes 
many more diseases. Many people are suffering from arsenicosis and many more are at risk. 
About 38,118 patients are identified as suffering from arsenicosis. The arsenic poisoning from the 
contamination of groundwater is very chronic in nature. Most of the time, the victim cannot 
detect symptoms until they are detected through screening. It has been found that the affected 
people were mostly adults those who have exposed to contaminated arsenic water for more than 6 
years.  
 
631 
 
3. Policy Statements 
There are number of policy documents relating to water supply in rural and urban areas in 
Bangladesh. The most important ones are National Policy for Safe Drinking Water and Sanitation 
(1998), National Water Policy (1998), National Policy for Arsenic Mitigation (2004), and Coastal 
Zone Policy (2005).  
   The National Policy for Safe Drinking Water and Sanitation (1998) recognizes that safe water 
and sanitation are essential for the development of public health. The Government's goal is to 
ensure that all people have access to safe water and sanitation services at an affordable cost. The 
specific goals related to urban areas are making safe drinking water available to each household, 
ensuring supply of quality water through observance of accepted quality standards, taking 
necessary measures for storage and use of rainwater and building capacity in local governments 
and communities to deal more effectively with problems relating to water supply and sanitation 
   One of the objectives of National Water Policy (NWP) is “To accelerate the development of 
sustainable public and private water delivery systems with appropriate legal and financial 
measures and incentives, including delineation of water rights and water pricing.” In this regard, 
the NWP has clear directives to ensure water to all facilitating availability of safe and affordable 
drinking water supplies through various means, including rainwater harvesting and conservation, 
improving efficiency of resource utilization through conjunctive use of all forms of surface water 
and groundwater for irrigation and urban water supply and allowing relevant public water supply 
agencies to gradually charge for their services. 
   Groundwater used for drinking in many areas of Bangladesh has been reported to have 
contamination by arsenic above the Bangladesh National Standard of 0.05 mg/l. Geographically, 
the tube wells in delta and flood plains regions, which comprise 72% of the land area, are more or 
less affected by arsenic contamination. The National Policy for Arsenic Mitigation (2004) gives 
preference to surface water over groundwater as source for water supply, promotes approved 
guidelines/protocols for installation of water supply technology options and assesses the needs 
for water supply intervention based on the status of contamination at village level. 
   The Coastal Zone Policy (CZPo, 2005) establishes the goal of integrated coastal zone 
management: “to create conditions, in which the reduction of poverty, development of 
sustainable livelihoods and the integration of the coastal zone into national processes can take 
place”. This policy promotes rainwater harvesting and conservation, excavation of ponds and 
tanks for conservation of water and local technology for water treatment (such as, pond sand 
filtering) that could be used for the supply of safe water. 
   Many policies emphasize the use of surface water and rainwater over groundwater as the 
drinking water source in Bangladesh. Major issue is lack of implementation steps and very slow 
process of implementation.     
   
4. Institutional Arrangements 
Altogether some 35 central government organizations, affiliated with 13 different ministries, have 
been identified with functions relevant to the water sector. However, not all of them are related to 
water supply. Department of Public Health Engineering (DPHE) under Local Government 
Division (LGD) is responsible for the installation of water supply system in rural areas and in 
urban areas outside Dhaka and Chittagong city. The City Corporations of Dhaka and Chittagong 
are supported by Water and Sewerage Authority (WASA), responsible for provision and up-keep 
of potable water supply and sewerage. In the other towns and cities, each Local Government 
632 
 
Institution is responsible for its own water supply and sewerage. Local and international NGOs 
are increasingly significant in influencing public policy on issues such as environment and water 
management planning. Universities also play an active role in water sector. Private sector 
activities have expanded significantly over the last 20 years with progressive liberalization of the 
water sector, and it is particularly active in minor irrigation and rural water supply. Developing 
partners are also active in support of water sector programmes and rural development. The main 
government agencies and their major responsibilities in the water supply sector are shown in 
Table 2. 
Table 2. Major agencies and their responsibilities in water supply 
 
Agencies Activities 
WARPO  Apex body in water sector 
 National level planning of water resources 
Department 
of Public 
Health 
Engineering 
(DPHE) 
 In rural areas, DPHE installed 1.1 million manually operated tube wells of 
various types.  
 Installed 26 water treatment plants (eight for the treatment of surface water 
and the rest to remove iron from groundwater).  
 Piped water supplies have been installed in 61 District towns and 34 Thana 
towns. 
Dhaka Water 
and 
Sewerage 
Authority 
(DWASA) 
 Apart from a small surface water supply of eight million gallons per day 
(8Mgd), all present supplies (200Mgd) come from 264 Deep Tube Wells 
(DTWs) operated by   WASA, including seven DTWs at Narayanganj.  
 To cope with present and future demand, plans are under consideration to 
construct a new supply with a 50Mgd treatment plant drawing water from 
the Sitalakhya River.  
Chittagong 
Water and 
Sewerage 
Authority 
(CWASA) 
 The first major investment of CWASA was a surface water scheme in 1987, 
which draws water from the Halda River and with its treatment plant, 
pumping station and transmission line, is capable of supplying 20Mgd.  
 The ongoing Second Interim Water Supply project will rehabilitate the 40 
existing DTWs and increase supplies to 20Mgd. 
 The Corporation is responsible for construction and maintenance of drains 
and also carries out some cleaning of septic tanks. 
NGOs The NGO Forum for Drinking Water Supply and Sanitation represents 598 NGOs 
and community based organizations (CBOs), in the ratio 65% NGOs and 35% 
CBOs.  
Private 
Sector 
The private sector has installed and operates at least half of all tube wells  
 
The government and non-governmental organizations in both rural and urban areas are 
implementing numerous water supply projects but the level of investment is insufficient to meet 
the growing urban demand and standards of services. On the other hand, rapid population growth 
and lack of overall coordination have increased the demand for water and created the conflicts. 
The widening gap between demand and supply of water is bringing severe socio-economic and 
environmental problems in Bangladesh. Strong efforts are being made to promote private sector 
investment in water supply through various projects. Urgent attention is being given to the 
arsenic problem, although so far the emphasis has been on research and testing rather than the 
widespread implementation of actual mitigation measures. Huge investment is required for 
drinking water supply in arsenic affected areas. The government has set the targets in the rural, 
urban and major cities as given in Table 3. 
633 
 
Table 3. Activities and their targets under scenario 
 
Cumulative Targets by the Year Sector/Activity 
2005 2010 2025 2050 
Water Supply 
1. Provision of arsenic mitigation activities 70 % 100% 100% 100% 
2. Access to safe water for basic needs (Towns and Rural 
Areas) 
95% 100% 100% 100% 
3. Provision of household piped water (Towns) 50% 70% 90% 100% 
4. Provision of household piped water (Rural Areas) 10% 10% 40% 90% 
5. Water quality surveillance 40% 60% 100% 100% 
Private Sector Participation 
1. Town water supply & sanitation 5% 15% 25% 50% 
2. Rural water supply & sanitation 80% 95% 95% 95% 
 
5. Water Supply System 
There are many systems available for water supply in arsenic affected areas.   
 
5.1. Dug well 
 
Dug well is the oldest method of water supply in rural Bangladesh. The supply source is the 
surface water stored in the upper layer underneath the ground surface, usually not more than 8-10 
m in depth that renews annually through flood and rainfall. The technology has been successfully 
revived with some modifications in many parts of the arsenic affected areas where the water is 
either free from arsenic or iron or the concentration is well below their acceptable limits. Though 
the number has become limited nowadays, wells or ring wells used to be a traditional source of 
potable water especially in the rural areas. In some arsenic-affected areas, those wells are revived 
as a source of safe drinking water.  
   In the recent pilot project areas, examples have been set of piped water supply to rural 
population using safe water sources from improved dug wells. Piped water supply system in a 
village in the Ishwardi in Pabna district by Dhaka community hospital is an example.. Local 
Government Institutions (LGIs) and Department of Public Health Engineering (DPHE) should 
facilitate the construction of dug wells in areas where they are the most appropriate solution. 
Construction difficulties may prevent dug wells from being deep enough to provide security of 
supply during prolonged droughts.  
 
5.2. Pond Sand Filter (PSF) 
 
Slow sand filters are package type filter units developed to treat surface waters of ponds for 
domestic consumption in the coastal saline belt. In this system, surface water in a small reservoir 
is underlain by a sand bed and the filtered water is collected through taps. The system popularly 
known as PSF is one of the alternative technologies for supplying arsenic free potable water, 
suitable for the households at village level. 
 
634 
 
   In some parts of the arsenic affected areas, pond sand filter technology for safe drinking water 
supply works better. If the pond could be protected from contamination, it would provide a 
source of drinking water with minimal treatment. Sanitary practices of the village people should 
be carefully kept far away from the ponds for successful use of the ponds. Many of these ponds 
belong to the Government. If these would be transferred to the local Government agency then 
those would be made responsible to take care of the pond and make it usable for the local 
inhabitants. 
   Many PSF have been installed by DPHE/UNICEF and some NGOs in areas of saline or arsenic 
contamination. Such typical system comprises a 0.25 ha pond (2 m deep) and a brick built sand 
filter incorporating a hand pump to serve a population of 1000 people with 12.5 l/c-d, after 
allowance is made for evaporation. The pond needs to be lined with clay or a membrane to 
minimize infiltration, fenced to keep out animals, and reserved only for drinking water (no 
washing of people, animals or machinery). In most areas, a surface water collector system would 
be required to fill the pond and a minimum of 1m depth of water should be ensured in the pond. It 
is required to refill the filter after collecting filtered water in order to allow time for water to filter 
through for the next user. The filters could remove iron, arsenic and pathogens, but not salt, and 
in saline areas the pond has to be filled with fresh water. 
   LGIs would coordinate the construction of ponds and filters with the help of DPHE/UNICEF. 
Operation and maintenance required would be undertaken by the community. Since construction 
would be by a Government agency, there could be major institutional constraints to its rapid 
execution. 
 
5.3. Rainwater harvesting 
 
Rainwater harvesting has been adopted as a solution for obtaining drinking water in coastal areas 
by DPHE/UNICEF since 1994. In these systems, rainwater collected from tin roofs or plastic 
sheets over thatched roofs has been channeled into large concrete storage tanks for drinking and 
cooking use throughout the dry season. Dependable annual rainfall in the central and east coast 
(Barguna to Cox’s Bazaar) is around 1200 mm a year, but in the West (Satkhira to Bagherhat) it 
is in the range 900 to 1100 mm. Assuming 75% to be captured in areas with 1000 mm rainfall, a 
catchment area of 4m2 is required per person. This corresponds closely with a typical roof area of 
12m2 for a family of five to six persons. Cost estimation has been carried out for a typical system 
for a household to take care of the drinking requirement of 5 l/c-d. According to an estimate, the 
capital investment cost per person benefited is about Tk1500 (Tk 70 =1 US$). The annual cost 
per m3 of water utilized, which comprises an O&M cost and an annualized cost of the capital 
invested, is about Tk100 (Tk 70 = 1US$). 
   Dhaka Water Supply and Sewerage Authority has shown that rainwater is free from bacteria 
and other pollutants (Begum and Karim 2000). Therefore, rainwater harvesting can be practiced 
in the community based water supply systems to combat the arsenic disaster in Bangladesh. 
Potable drinking water from rainwater harvesting could be supplied effectively to the people in 
arsenic contaminated areas. In a water supply system totally based on rainwater harvesting, the 
excessive rainwater collected in wet season could also be stored for consumption during the dry 
season. For this, sustainable collection, storage and distribution methods need to be developed 
based on the existing practices in India, Maldives, Thailand and some of the Caribbean countries. 
In addition, proper education and training should also be provided with state of the art options for 
storage and distribution of rainwater in order to avoid microbiological contamination. 
635 
 
 
   Vast storage of rainwater is required to supply water throughout the year. It is possible by 
providing several rainwater harvesters in series or constructing large underground storage tanks, 
which would hold enough water to cover the whole year. Rainwater can also be stored in sanitary 
ponds. A community drinking water supply scheme based on rainwater in sanitary ponds with 
provision for withdrawal of water through hand pumps and treatment through PSF-like filters is a 
good option. This method would also be cost-effective and feasible in rural areas. Therefore, the 
development of a rainwater harvesting plant should be given high priority to mitigate the arsenic 
disaster in Bangladesh. 
 
5.4. Piped distribution system from surface water source 
 
The Asia Arsenic Network (AAN) installed a pipeline water supply system using baor (oxbow 
lake) water at Putkhali union under Shahrsha upazila of Jessore district under the JICA 
Partnership project. The pipeline water supply system consists of surface water treatment unit 
with multistage filters and pipeline delivery system. The filter unit is comprised of an up-flow 
roughing filter (URF) and slow sand filter (SSF). In some areas, underground water is pumped up 
and supplied through pipeline from an overhead tank. In those cases, no filtration unit is required. 
   Water resources in the rivers and streams around most of the major cities are subject to the risk 
of pollution by industrial waste disposal. The use of the resource is difficult without expensive 
treatments. The alternative option is to use surface water from remote point of the sources where 
quantity and quality are not a constraint for the development. Planning of any intake on a major 
river needs channel stability including protection against erosion. There is also a risk of the low 
flow channel being shifted away from the selected intake point. Location of the intake at a fixed 
protected site, such as a bridge, is not always available. In-spite of that, raw river water will 
require primary treatment particularly the sediment removal and final treatment before water is 
transmitted in the distribution system. This two-fold treatment of surface water is expensive. 
   DPHE is the lead agency for the arsenic mitigation through out the country. Bangladesh 
Arsenic Mitigation and Water Supply Project (BAMWAS) supported by World Bank and 
many other projects supported by UNICEF, DANIDA, World Vision, AAN are working 
closely with DPHE for the arsenic mitigation in the affected area. DPHE has undertaken 
a program to establish 20,000 safe water supply sources and 1,000 villages with piped 
water supply.  
 
 
6. Water Supply Strategy in Arsenic Affected Areas 
 
A decade has passed since arsenic problem in Bangladesh was identified. The government, 
private sector and non-government organizations have developed a variety of strategies and 
technologies to mitigate the problem. Safe water supply in arsenic contaminated areas is a 
priority to avoid arsenic poisoning. The following strategy may be adopted in the arsenic affected 
areas.  
 
 Groundwater act should be enacted to control activities regarding sustainable 
groundwater exploration, development and management. An “Arsenic Support Cell” may 
636 
 
be constituted to support the already created high-powered secretaries committee and 
national experts.   
 
 Uncontaminated shallow tube wells will continue to be the sources of safe drinking water 
supply for the larger fraction of rural population even in arsenic affected areas for years 
until an alternative system is developed. A regular water quality surveillance program is 
also required to monitor the possibility of contamination. 
 Deep tube wells may be installed, avoiding shallow arsenic contaminated aquifers, to 
produce water of acceptable quality for water supply in arsenic problem areas. The 
boreholes of the deep tube wells are required to be sealed at the level of impermeable 
strata to avoid percolation of arsenic contaminated water. Aquifers formed by oxidized 
coarse reddish sands appear to be safe for installation of tube wells. Hydro geological 
investigation is needed to ascertain the mechanism of recharge and possibility of 
contamination of deep aquifers. 
 Dug wells and infiltration galleries may be constructed where feasible to supply water 
free from arsenic contamination. Experimental units are required to be constructed in 
arsenic affected areas to evaluate effectiveness, people’s acceptability and willingness to 
keep the system operational. 
 Small arsenic removal plants may be designed and installed to reduce arsenic in 
groundwater to acceptable levels. Community type Fe-As removal plants attached to tube 
wells has good potential and can be installed to remove both iron and arsenic from tube 
well water.  
 Household and community type treatment units developed by different organizations can 
be used for treatment of arsenic contaminated water but higher costs may be a constraint. 
The use of unknown chemicals and processes for water treatment without adequate 
information should be discouraged. 
 Rainwater is arsenic-safe and potable in principle. Therefore, collection and usage of 
rainwater should be practiced in some areas of the Chittagong Hill Tracts and coastal 
areas of Bangladesh.   
 
 
7. Conclusion 
 
The arsenic contamination is strongly concentrated in different parts of Southeast and Southwest 
region of the country. Areas are found along the western border of the South West, large areas of 
the South East, the extreme North East, spots in North East of Dhaka along the Meghna, and at 
points along the Ganges/Padma. On average 1 in 3 shallow tubewells in affected rural areas is 
producing water with arsenic more than the acceptable limit. In acute arsenic affected areas as 
high as 3 in 4 shallow wells are contaminated. It is estimated that around 30 million people are 
exposed to arsenic in drinking water above acceptable level.  
   Arsenic contamination in groundwater is a deadly devastation for safe water supply through 
pump technology in Bangladesh. The avoidance of arsenic is also likely by the use of surface 
water, rainwater, and alternative groundwater sources. In this context, a comprehensive water 
distribution system must be implemented and a national water resources management policy 
should be established in order to limit the indiscriminate extraction of water. Rainwater 
harvesting offers the advantage of a private rather than a shared supply and will reduce the risks 
637 
 
from drinking non-potable water. Cultural prohibition against drinking rainwater might reduce 
community interest. The relatively high capital costs will be beyond the reach of many 
households, and substantial subsidies will be needed. DPHE and NGOs would promote rainwater 
harvesting in areas where it is the most attractive solution. Provided that funds are available, 
rainwater harvesting facilities can be installed very quickly. The facilities are vulnerable to 
exceptionally long droughts, water usage in excess of the assumed basic needs, or storm damage 
to the water collection system. This option applies in areas where there is no other safe source of 
water. It is most likely appropriate in coastal areas with saline groundwater. 
 
 
References 
 
Ahmed K.M. (2000). Groundwater arsenic contamination in Bangladesh: an overview. In: 
Bhattacharya P., and A.H. Welch, editors. Arsenic in groundwater of sedimentary 
aquifers. Abstracts, Pre-Congress Workshop, 31st International Geological Congress; 2-3 
August 2000; Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. pp. 3-5. 
Begum Z.R, and M.M. Karim. (2000). Arsenic groundwater contamination of Bangladesh: 
community participation in groundwater resources management. Proceedings of the 93rd 
Annual Meeting and Exhibition of Air & Waste Management Association; 18-22 June 
2000; Salt Lake, Utah, USA: Air & Waste Management Association. pp. 1-10. 
Dhar R.K., B.K. Biswas, G. Samanta, B.K. Mandal, D. Chakraborti, S. Roy, J. Jafar, A. Islam, G. 
Ara, S. Kabir, A.W. Khan, S.A. Ahmed, and A.A. Hadi. (1997). Groundwater arsenic 
calamity in Bangladesh. Current Science 73(1): 48-59. 
Karim M.M., Y. Komori, and M. Alam. (1997). Subsurface arsenic occurrence and depth of 
contamination in Bangladesh. Journal of Environmental Chemistry 7(4): 783-792. 
Karim M.M. (2000). Arsenic in groundwater and health problems in Bangladesh. Water 
Resources 34(1): 304-310. 
Meng X.G., G.P. Korfiatis, C. Christodoulatos, and S.B. Bang. (2001). Treatment of arsenic in 
Bangladesh well water using a household co-precipitation and filtration system. Water 
Resources 35(12): 2805-2810. 
Nickson R.T., J.M. McArthur, W.G. Burgess, K.M. Ahmed, P. Ravenscroft, and M. Rahman. 
(1998). Arsenic poisoning of Bangladesh groundwater. Nature 395(6700): 338. 
Safiuddin M., and M.M. Karim. (2001). Groundwater arsenic contamination in Bangladesh: 
causes, effects and remediation. Proceedings of the 1st IEB International Conference and 
7th Annual Paper Meet on Civil Engineering; 2-3 November 2001; Chittagong, 
Bangladesh: Institution of Engineers, Bangladesh. pp. 220-230. 
Smith A.H., E.O. Lingas, and M. Rahman. (2000). Contamination of drinking water by arsenic in 
Bangladesh: a public health emergency. Bulletin of World Health Organization 78(8): 
1093-1103. 
SOES and DCH. (2000). Groundwater Arsenic Contamination in Bangladesh. A Survey Report 
by School of Environmental Studies, Jadavpur University, India and Dhaka Community 
Hospital, Bangladesh. 
World Bank. (2000). The Bangladesh Arsenic Mitigation Water Supply Project: Addressing a 
Massive Public Health Crisis. World Bank Report; June 2000; World Bank. 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
ASSESSMENT OF SHALLOW GROUNDWATER QUALITY IN SOME SELECTED 
WARDS OF KCC AREA: SOUTHWEST REGION OF BANGLADESH 
 
 
Sajal Kumar Adhikary1, Md. Manjur-A-Elahi2, Md. Monzur Hossain3 and A.M. Iqbal Hossain4 
 
 
ABSTRACT: In Bangladesh, the southwest coastal region is facing great challenges in meeting 
the rising freshwater demand due to limited water supply from the available surface and 
groundwater sources, which are affected by the salinity and other water quality problems. Khulna 
City Corporation (KCC), which is located in this region, is one of the affected urban cities in the 
country. City water supply is seriously affected by the abundant presence of salinity in the 
groundwater sources. In addition, other water quality parameters, which are also present in 
groundwater that has a direct impact on the city’s water supply and industrial development. At 
present, KWASA is supplying 100 million liters of water against a total demand of 240 million 
liters every day to the city dwellers from its 70 production well. Therefore, many city dwellers 
rely on groundwater from shallow aquifer through hand tube wells. Considering the above facts, 
a study was undertaken to assess the water quality of shallow aquifers in the KCC area for 
drinking and industrial purposes. Six wards (e.g. ward no. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19) of KCC area 
covering the central part of the Khulna city were selected for the present study. Thirty-six 
groundwater samples from shallow depth (5 samples from each ward) were collected every 
month for a period of total eight months (from July 2010 to February 2011) and analyzed for pH, 
iron, chloride, TDS, hardness, color, alkalinity, turbidity, electrical conductivity. The analysis 
shows that salinity varies from 1012 mg/L to 160 mg/L with an average value of 556 mg/L and 
76% of all samples exceeds BDS allowable chloride limit whereas 22% of all samples exceeds 
WHO recommend value. The result also shows that salinity is lower in monsoon (from May to 
October) period and due to decrease of upstream flow, absence of rainfall and seawater intrusion 
salinity increases drastically in non-monsoon (from November to April) period. During the study 
period 45% and 17% of all samples exceed the recommended iron limit for drinking water by 
BDS and WHO and maximum value was 2.30 mg/L obtained in Sonarbangla road in the city. 
However, TDS classification of groundwater shows that maximum samples lie within good (300-
600) mg/L and fair (600-900) mg/L class and 24% samples were found to be unacceptable. The 
hardness values represents that the groundwater of the study area is unsuitable for drinking as 
58% samples exceeds BDS allowable limit. During the study, maximum water samples lie in hard 
(150-300) mg/L and at the beginning of dry period (from November to February) water becomes 
very hard (>300 mg/L). In addition, the maximum and minimum values of electrical conductivity 
                                                        
1Assistant Professor, Department of Civil Engineering, Khulna University of Engineering & Technology 
(KUET), Khulna, Bangladesh. sajaladhikary@yahoo.com    
2Deputy Project Engineer, DOM-INNO Builders Ltd., Dhaka, Bangladesh. manjurkuet@gmail.com  
3Postgraduate Student, Department of Civil Engineering, Khulna University of Engineering & Technology 
(KUET), Khulna, Bangladesh. monzurce@gmail.com  
4Project Engineer, Robintex Group, Narayanganj, Dhaka, Bangladesh. asif.ce.kuet@gmail.com  
639 
 
were found as 3120 and 320 µS/cm, respectively and about 57% sample exceeds BDS 
recommended value. The study also reveals that except very few cases, values of pH, turbidity, 
color and alkalinity of almost all samples satisfy the allowable limited recommended by the 
WHO and BDS guidelines. 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Water is one of the vital components of the physical environment of the earth. Annual report of 
CIMMYT reveals that, in the global water resources about 97.5% is saline water mainly in 
oceans and only 2.5% is available as fresh water and 70% of it is locked in icecaps and glaciers 
or lies in deep underground reservoirs. An infinitesimal proportion (0.007%) of all water on the 
earth is readily available freshwater. The quality of drinking water is closely associated with 
human health, and providing safe drinking water is one of the public health priorities. Estimated 
80 percent of all diseases and over one-third of deaths in developing countries are caused by the 
consumption of contaminated water, and on an average as much as one tenth of each person’s 
productive time is sacrificed to water-related diseases. The quality of groundwater (GW) at any 
point below the surface reflects the combined effects of many processes along the GW flow path 
(Jeevanandam et al. 2007). Geochemical processes have been shown to have an influence on the 
prevalence of anthropogenic and natural contaminants in coastal environments worldwide 
(Kookana and Aylmore, 1994). It is estimated that approximately one-third of the world’s 
population use GW for drinking (Nickson et al. 2005). However, in the coastal regions in any 
country, GW quality patterns are complex because of the input from many different water sources. 
These include precipitation, seawater, ascending deep groundwater, and anthropogenic sources 
such as wastewater or irrigation return flow (Ramkumar and Anita, 2010).  
   Bangladesh is largely dependent on the GW for drinking and irrigation uses, and 90% of 
drinking water is abstracted from aquifers. Numerous water quality problems exist in GW and 
surface water (SW) systems in Bangladesh, especially in its southwestern coastal belt, where 
salinity is a very big problem at present. Khulna city is located on the banks of the Rupsha and 
Bhairab Rivers in the south-west region of the country. The increase in salinity in Khulna started 
after the commencement in 1975 of the Farrakka Barrage operation in India, which significantly 
reduced the flow in the Ganges, located at upstream of the Gorai River, a major source of 
freshwater to the rivers surrounding Khulna. At present, the principle cause of salinity intrusion 
in Khulna region is the drop of hydraulic head during the dry period (November to May) into 
both SW and GW of the area (Hassan, 1992; Hassan et al., 1998). In case of fishery, increased 
salinity affects spawning ground leading to substantial reductions in the inland open water fishery 
(Rabbi and Ahmed, 1997). As being of divisional headquarter, a large number of industries has 
been built up in Khulna city areas. Most of the industries in Khulna region are reported to have 
suffered from the increase in salinity. The losses resulted due to increased cost of freshwater 
importation, frequent leakage of condensers due to uses of saline water and production loss and 
disruption of power supply from the Goalpara Power station. From December 1975 to June 1976, 
it was estimated that the increased salinity caused industrial losses of $8 million. During the 
period 1976-1993, total loss in the industrial sectors was estimated to $37 million (Mirza, 1996). 
   All rice paddy verities in Bangladesh are very sensitive to increase water and soil salinity. 
Excess salinity reduces the osmotic activity of plants and thus interferes with the absorption of 
water and nutrients from the soil (Saleh et al. 1999). A number of studies have been carried out to 
observe the effect of GW quality on the yield and growth of crops in Bangladesh. It was reported 
640 
 
that due to the high value of salinity in the southern part of Bangladesh, growth and yield of rice 
are comparatively less than that is irrigated with low saline water. In addition, growth of rice 
plants decreases with the increase of salinity in irrigation water. In the southwestern districts of 
Bangladesh, there is a reduction in crop yield due to the low quality irrigated water. Shahidullah 
et al. (2000) in their paper, attempted to assess the GW quality in a selected area (Phulpur Upazila 
of Mymensingh district) of Bangladesh. Their results suggest that there was neither salinity nor 
toxicity problem of irrigation water, so that GW can safely be used for long-term irrigation. 
Quddus and Zaman (1996) studied the irrigation water quality in some selected villages of 
Meherpur district of Bangladesh. They argued that the major ions present in irrigation water were 
Calcium, Magnesium, Sodium, Bicarbonate, Sulphate and Chloride. 
   In 1981, KCC was able to provide 5 million gallons of water in a day to the city dwellers. 
Nevertheless, it is not enough to serve the urban population because the total demand was 15 
million gallons. KCC reported that the total demand of water at present is about thirty million 
gallons but the supply of water is half of this by which only 30% people are served. The KWASA, 
established in March, 2008, has 70 production wells (in 21 wards out of 31 wards), and there are 
3442 deep tube-wells and 6250 semi deep tube-wells and 227 km of water lines and about 15,000 
water connections in the city covering the city area. According to official source, KWASA 
authority currently supplies about 100 million liters of water every day against the demand for 24 
crore liters in the city of 15 lakh inhabitants. Prior to the dry season, the daily water supply was 
about 12-13 crore liters. Besides salinity, there are so many problems in GW in various wards of 
KCC area. The inhabitants of Khlishpur area have been faced impurities in KCC supply water 
and the inhabitants of Boyra area suffered from high concentration of iron as well as the people 
of the Fulbarigate area suffered from iron problem in shallow tube-well. There are so many 
problems, but we are going to address some physical and chemical water quality parameters 
problems such as pH, Chloride, Iron, Total Dissolved Solids (TDS), Turbidity, Alkalinity, 
Electrical Conductivity (EC), Hardness, and Color for GW. Considering the existing problems 
and dependency on GW, the present study attempts to evaluate the GW quality in KCC area. 
 
 
2. Materials and Methods 
 
2.1. Description of the Study Area  
 
The study area Khulna City Corporation (KCC) is an expanding center of southwestern 
Bangladesh, which is being directly influenced by tides. Khulna lies in the point where the river 
Bhairab meets Sundarban route. The Bhairab in the north side, Rupsa River in the middle side 
and Posur in the southern side flows along the western side of the city. It is the divisional 
headquarters of Khulna division and a major industrial and commercial center. The city currently 
covers an area of 46 sq. km and the population of the city, under the jurisdiction of the city 
corporation, was about 1 million in 2010 estimation. The city along with its surrounding is 
bounded by the longitude 89028'– 89037'east and latitude 22046'–22058' north and its elevation is 
7ft. above mean sea level. The mean annual temperature from 2001 to 2007 was 26.660C, the 
average for January is 18.80C (minimum) and for May 30.30C (maximum). Khulna receives a 
mean annual rainfall about 1620mm. The mean monthly rainfall varies from 2mm to 341mm. The 
main source of rainfall is southwestern monsoon. About 90% rainfall occurs between May to 
October (monsoon period) and rest 10% occurs in November-April (non-monsoon period). 
 
641 
 
 
Figure 1: KCC map showing all wards and sample locations 
 
   Khulna City Corporation (KCC), the third largest city in Bangladesh, covers an area of 46 sq. 
km comprises of 31 wards and is located beside the Bhairab River. Out of 31 wards, six wards 
(ward no 14, 15, 16, 17, 18 and 19) were selected for the study, which mainly covers the center 
part of the city. All these selected wards are close to each other. Thirty GW samples from shallow 
depth (5 samples from each ward) were collected every month for a period of total eight months 
(from July 2010 to February 2011) and their locations are presented in Figure 1. The sampling 
locations in each ward were selected in such a way that it represents the entire area of that ward. 
It is performed by taking the water supply network map of KCC as a key reference. 
642 
 
2.2. Collection and Testing of Water Samples  
 
After finalizing the sampling locations in the study area, GW samples were collected from thirty-
six representative shallow tube wells from the month of July 2010 to February 2011 to cover both 
monsoon and non-monsoon period in a year. Plastic bottles of 1-liter capacity were used for this 
purpose. They were thoroughly cleaned by rinsing 3 to 4 times with sampling water. Before 
sampling from well, sufficient amount of water was pumped out so that the sample represents the 
GW from which the well is fed (Raghunath, 1990). Then the containers were filled up to the brim 
and were immediately sealed to avoid exposure to air (Clesceri et al. 1989). The containers were 
labeled including its station name, source, number, date & time for identification and brought to 
the environmental engineering laboratory of KUET. The GW samples were analyzed for pH, 
Electrical conductivity (EC), Chloride (Cl), Iron (Fe), Total Dissolved Solids (TDS), Hardness, 
Turbidity, Alkalinity and Color. TDS, EC and pH were determined by TDS meter, Conductivity 
meter and pH meter respectively. Iron and color were determined by Spectrophotometer and 
turbidity was measured by Hellige turbid meter. Chloride, hardness and alkalinity were 
determined by titration method. For chloride test 0.0141N AgNO3 with K2Cr2O7 indicator was 
used and standard soap solution was used for hardness test. Standard 0.02N H2SO4 with methyl 
orange indicator was used for alkalinity measurement. 
 
3. Results and Discussions 
 
3.1. Variation of pH 
 
The pH value is an important index of acidity or alkalinity and the concentration of hydrogen ion 
in groundwaters (Murugesan et al. 2006). pH values of all water samples of different wards were 
in permissible range of 6.5-8.5 according to WHO and ECR ’97 recommended values. The 
seasonal variation of groundwater pH is presented in Figure 2. It is observed that in the month of 
February 11, GW reaches to its average (30 samples) maximum pH value, near about 7.8 and 
minimum value in September 10, which is close to 6.8. The survival of aquatic organisms is also 
greatly influenced by the pH of water bodies because most of their metabolic activities are pH 
dependent (Chen and Lin, 1995). The pH values are determind by taking the average of 30 
samples for each month of the study area. A controlled values of pH is desired in water supplies, 
seweage treatement and chemical process plants. In water supply pH is important for coagulation, 
disenfiction, water softening and corrosion control. 
 
3.2.  Assessment of Salinity 
 
The maximum and minimum chloride conccentration were determined about 1012 mg/L 
(February 11) and 160 mg/L (July 10) (Table 1). Chlorides gain access to natural waters in many 
ways. High chloride concentration values are quite may be due to the saline water intrusion 
problem, which is quite frequent in KCC area. Due to less rainfall in the non-monsoon period 
(November to April), the salinity level tends to increase from the very beginning of October. The 
seasonal variation of salinity in the KCC area reveals that salinity has been started to increase 
gradually from November due to recharge of aquifers by saline water (Adhikary et al., 2011) and 
in the month of February, it has been increased to a high value in all wards (Figure 3). Chloride in 
GW mostly comes from evaporation, salty connate water and seawater (Nasrin et al. 2005). GW 
containing significant amount of Chloride also tend to have high amount Na ions indicating the 
643 
 
Ju l-
1 0
A u g
-1 0
S e p
-10
O c t
-1 0
N o v
-1 0
D ec
-10
Ja n
-1 1
F e b
-1 1
6 .0
6 .5
7 .0
7 .5
8 .0
8 .5
9 .0
pH
T im e  (M o n th )
 T e s te d  V a lu e  o f p H  
 U p p e r &  L o w e r A llo w a b le  L im it
 
  Figure 2: Seasonal variation of pH in shallow GW in the study area 
 
Table 1: Summary of statistics for measured GWQ parameters in the study area 
 
pH EC Cl- Iron TDS Hardness Alkalinity Turbidity Color Statistics (-) (µS/cm) (mg/L) (mg/L) (mg/L) (mg/L) (mg/L) (NTU) (pt.co) 
Mean 7.8 1777 712 1.21 1043 641 59 5.91 28 
Max 8.7 3120 1012 2.30 1598 1094 170 78 74 
Min 6.2 786 369 0.07 528 276 20 0.76 4 
St. Dev. 0.72 682 177 0.72 244 207 32 16 19 
 
possibility of contacts with water of marine origin. However, ECR ’97 recommended range of 
Chloride in drinking water is 150 mg/L to 600 mg/L and 250 mg/L is recommended by WHO. 
Throughout the study period 76% of samples exceeds WHO values, whereas 22% samples 
exceeds ECR ’97 recommended value. High chloride content in inland water distribution system 
usually indicates sewage pollution. At concentrations above 250 mg/L, chloride rich water gives 
a salty test, causes various diseases such as high blood pressure, although it depends on 
individual adaptibility. 
 
3.3. Electrical Conductivity (EC) 
 
Electrical conductivity (EC) represents the total concentration of soluble salts in water. It is used 
to measure the salinity hazard to crops as it reflects the TDS in GW. Throughout the study period 
the maximum EC was 3120 µS/cm and found in sample no. 9 (Gabtola road) in February 11 and 
minimum value was 320 µS/cm, found in sample no 21 (Mahtab uddin road) in September 10. 
Within the study period, 57% sample exceeds ECR ’97 permissible limits (600-1000) µS/cm. The 
conductivity of GW in various ward is nearly same from July 10 to December 10 and it tends to 
increase at the very beginning of January 11 (Figure 4). Higher values are generally noticed in the 
word no 15 (BSTI Bhaban, Port staff quarter, Gabtola, Kodomtola area) and ward no. 19 (B.K 
Roy road, Goborchaka, Farajipara, Haji ismail road area). The higher value of EC may be due to 
long residence time and existing lithology of the study area (Ballukaraya and Ravi, 1999). 
644 
 
100
200
300
400
500
600
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
Jul-
10
Aug
-10
Sep
-10
Oct
-10
Nov
-10
Dec
-10
Jan
-11
Feb
-11
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Jul-
10
Aug
-10
Sep
-10
Oct
-10
Nov
-10
Dec
-10
Jan
-11
Feb
-11
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
9
C
hl
or
id
e 
(m
g/
L) Ward No. 14
 
C
hl
or
id
e 
(m
g/
L)
Ward No. 15
C
hl
or
id
e 
(m
g/
L) Ward No. 16
 
C
hl
or
id
e 
(m
g/
L) Ward No. 17
C
hl
or
id
e 
(m
g/
L)
Time (Month)
Ward No. 18
C
hl
or
id
e 
(m
g/
L)
Time (Month)
Ward No. 19
 
Figure 3: Spatial and seasonal variation of salinity in the study area 
 
Based on EC value, there does not exist any excellent (<250 µS/cm) class of water both in wet 
season and dry season. Moreover, maximum (73% in wet season and 72% in dry season) water 
lies within permissible range (750-2000) µS/cm, 16-25% in good class and 2-7% are uncertain 
(Table 2). Only 5% samples are unsuitable (>3000 µS/cm) in dry season.  
 
Table 2. Quality of GW for irrigation purposes based on EC at 250 C 
 
Fraction of different conductivity range (%) EC 
(µS/cm) 
Quality of 
Water Wet season  
(July 10 to October 10) 
Dry season  
(November 10 to February 11) 
<250 Excelllent 0 0 
250-750 Good 25 16 
750-2000 Permissible 73 72 
2000-3000 Doubtful 2 7 
>3000 Unsuitable 0 5 
 
645 
 
J u
l-1
0
A u
g -1
0
S e
p -1
0
O c
t-1
0
N o
v-1
0
D e
c -1
0
J a
n -1
1
F e
b -1
1
0
5 0 0
1 0 0 0
1 5 0 0
2 0 0 0
2 5 0 0
El
ec
tri
ca
l C
on
du
ct
iv
ity
 (
S/
cm
)
T im e  ( m o n t h )
 W a r d  N o .  1 4   W a r d  N o .  1 5  
 W a r d  N o .  1 6   W a r d  N o .  1 7  
 W a r d  N o .  1 8   W a r d  N o .  1 9
 
Figure 4: Spatial and temporal variation of EC in the study area 
 
3.4. Variation of Iron 
 
From the study it has been found that, ward no 17 posseses maximum (35%) iron content, where 
as the ward no 15 and 16 has very low level of iron content. Comparing to the other wards, the 
iron content is high in ward no 17, 18 and 19 in the month of February 11 (Figure 5). WHO and 
ECR ’97 recommended value is 0.3 mg/L and (0.3-1) mg/L respectively. Minimum value of iron 
(0.07 mg/L) is found in the month of July 10 in BSTI bhaban (sample no. 7) of ward no 15 and 
maximum value is 2.30 mg/L, found in Sonarbangla road (sample no 24) in ward no 18 in the 
month of February 11. During the study period 17% samples exceeds ECR ’97 recommended 
value and 67% samples exceeds WHO permissioble value for drinking wate. Iron defects lead to 
anemia, causing tiredness, headaches and loss of concentration. 
J u
l-1
0
A u
g -1
0
S e
p -1
0
O c
t-1
0
N o
v -1
0
D e
c -1
0
J a
n -1
1
F e
b -1
1
0 .0
0 .4
0 .8
1 .2
1 .6
2 .0
Iro
n 
(m
g/
L)
T im e  ( m o n th )
 W a r d  N o .  1 4   W a r d  N o .  1 5  
 W a r d  N o .  1 6   W a r d  N o .  1 7  
 W a r d  N o .  1 8   W a r d  N o .  1 9
 
Figure 5: Spatial and seasonal variation of GW Iron content in the study area 
646 
 
3.5. Total Dissolved Solids (TDS) 
 
The TDS value has been increased to an amount of 1598 mg/L in sample no 10 (wireless 
approach road) of  ward no 15 in the month of February 11 and in the month of July 10 it 
obtained its minimum value of 213mg/L in sample no 22 (Gollamari sawshan) of ward no 18. As 
being of coastal area, seawater intrusion is the main factor for the increased amount of TDS in 
groundwater, which was supported by a high value of sodium and chloride. In our study area, 
TDS values has been started to increase gradually from the very begnining of dry period. The 
trend of increase of TDS is shown in Fig 6. The increased value of TDS in groundwater is likely a 
result of dissoulution, the weathering of sediment, and the solubility of lime and gypsum, all of 
which considerably increases TDS in GW (Jain et al., 1997). The maximum concentration of 
TDS were 1132 mg/L, 1598 mg/L, 1213 mg/L, 1456 mg/L, 1326 mg/L and 1481 mg/L in ward no 
14, 15,16, 17, 18 and 19 respectively observed in the month of February 11. During the study 
period, 16% samples exceed the permissible limits (1000 mg/L) of WHO and ECR ’97 
throughout the study period. Depending on the TDS values, GW is to be grouped as excellent, 
good, fair, poor and unacceptable (Ahmed and Rahman, 2000). Most of the samples lies between 
good (300-600 mg/L) and fair (600-900 mg/L) class and in the month of February 11 24% 
samples are unacceptable and there is no sample in excellent (<300 mg/L) class from July to 
November (Table 3). In general, waters with a TDS value <500 mg/L are most desirable for 
domestic purposes. The high value of TDS indicates that huge amount of mineral salts are present 
in the study area.  
 
Jul
-10
Au
g-1
0
Se
p-1
0
O c
t-1
0
No
v-1
0
D e
c-1
0
Jan
-11
Fe
b-1
1
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
To
ta
l D
is
so
lv
ed
 S
ol
id
s 
(m
g/
L)
T im e  (m on th )
 W a rd  N o . 14   W ard  N o . 15  
 W a rd  N o . 16   W ard  N o . 17  
 W a rd  N o . 18   W ard  N o . 19
 
Figure 6: Spatial and Temporal variation of TDS in GW of study area 
 
3.6. Variation of Hardness 
 
The maximum (1094 mg/L) hardness was found in sample no 26 (B.K Roy road) and minimum 
(72 mg/L) value was found in sample 12 (PMG quarter). Due to less rainfall there occurred lesser 
amount of dilution of hard water and consequrntly hardness of the GW increases gradually in all 
the wards of study area from the month of December 10 to the end of study period (Figure 7). 
647 
 
Table 3. Seasonal variation of TDS in GW of the study area 
 
Fraction of different TDS range (%) TDS 
(mg/L) 
Quality of 
Water Jul-10 Aug-10 Oct-10 Nov-10 Dec-10 Jan-11 Feb-11 
<300 Excellent 20 20 13 21 28 26 3 
300-600 Good 37 41 53 45 37 40 13 
600-900 Fair 45 39 31 34 19 19 14 
900-1200 Poor 1 0 3 0 14 11 46 
>1200 Unacceptable 0 0 0 0 2 4 24 
 
Jul
-10
Au
g-1
0
Se
p-1
0
O c
t-1
0
N o
v-1
0
De
c-1
0
Jan
-11
Fe
b-1
1
0
2 0 0
4 0 0
6 0 0
8 0 0
H
ar
dn
es
s 
(m
g/
L)
T im e  (m o n th )
 W a rd  N o . 1 4   W a rd  N o .  1 5  
 W a rd  N o . 1 6   W a rd  N o .  1 7  
 W a rd  N o . 1 8   W a rd  N o .  1 9
 
Figure 7: Spatial and seasonal variation of GW hardness in the study area 
 
Based on the hardness value GW may be classified as soft (<75 mg/L), moderately soft (75-150 
mg/L), hard (150-300 mg/L) and very hard (>300 mg/L). During the study period a very few (4-
5%) percentage of water was found in soft class and 3-14% of moderately soft water were up to 
November 10. Hard water was found in a nearly same percentage up to November and after 
November, it has been started to decrease with the rapid increase of very hard water and in the 
month of February 11 near about 93% water becomes very hard (Figure 8). According to 
ECR ’97 and WHO, the allowable limit of hardness is about 200-500 mg/L and 500 mg/L 
respectively. Test result reveals that in monsoon period (July to October) water is less hard and 
then it increases gradually due to absence of rainfall and evaporation and in the month of 
February 11 about 58% samples exceeds WHO permissible limit. After analyzing the hardness 
data of all samples, it was found that only 15% samples remains within the WHO most desirable 
limit. Soap consumption by hard waters represents an economic loss to the water use. The 
precipitate formed by hardness and soaps adheres to surfaces of tubes, sinks, and dishwashers and 
may stain clothing, dishes, and other items, which finally causes an environmental hazard. 
648 
 
Jul-
10
Aug
-10
Sep
-10
Oc
t-10
Nov
-10
Dec
-10
Jan
-11
Feb
-11
0
20
40
60
80
100
H
ar
dn
es
s 
R
an
ge
 (%
)
Time (month)
 <75 mg/L (soft)  75-150 mg/L (moderately soft) 
 150-300 mg/L (Hard)  >300 mg/L (very hard) 
 
Figure 8: Variation of hardness in GW in the study area 
 
3.7. Variation of Alkalinity 
 
The maximum alkalinity of GW was 20 mg/L (Sample no 25, Haji Tamij uddin road) in the 
month of February 11 and minimum value was 560 mg/L (sample no 19, Khulna Medical Collge) 
in the month of November 11. The trend of Figure 9 reveals that, alkalinity level remians nearly 
same up to October 11 and in November 11 it increases sudddenly and then decreasesd in 
December. It also represents that from July 10 to January 11 it always exceeds the WHO 
permissible limits (200 mg/L) and then it goes to a significant decrese in February 11. It may be 
happened due to the presence of strong acid in the adjacent GW aquifer. Throughout the study 
period only 8% sample exceeds the Bangladesh limit (500 mg/L) of GW alkalinity. Moderate 
concentration alkalinity is desirable in most water supplies to balance the corrosive effects of 
acidity. Highly mineralized alkaline waters also cause excessive drying of the skin because they 
tend to remove normal skin oils.  
 
Jul-1
0
Aug-
10
Sep-
10
Oct-
10
Nov-
10
Dec-
10
Jan-
11
Feb-
11
0
100
200
300
400
A
lk
al
in
ity
 (m
g/
L)
Time (Month)  
Figure 9: Seasonal variation of alkalinity in GW of the study area 
649 
 
Jul-
10
Aug
-10
Sep
-10
Oct
-10
Nov
-10
Dec
-10
Jan
-11
Feb
-11
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Tu
rb
id
ity
 R
an
ge
 (%
)
Time (month)
 0-5 NTU  5-10 NTU  >10 NTU
 
Figure 10: Seasonal variation of GW Turbidity in the study area 
 
3.8.  Assessment of Turbidity and Color 
 
The maximum (86 NTU) turbidity of GW was found in sample no. 4 (Rayer Mahal Bazar) and 
and minimum (0.36 NTU) value was found in sample no 20 (Khulna Mohila Krira Complex). 
Within the study period greater than 80% samples did not exceeds the WHO permissible limit (5 
NTU) of turbidity and in July and October, 100% samples were within WHO limit (Figure 10). In 
the month of November 10 only 10% and in the month of February only 7% sample exceeds the 
ECR ’97 recommended value (10 NTU) of turbidity. Turbid water is not suitable as it causes 
quick clogging of filtered, which implies the use of pretreatment plant. 
   Color in water is primarily due to the presence of colored organic substances (primarily 
humic substances), metals such as Fe, Mn or highly industrial wastes (from pulp, paper and 
textile industries). In addition, slaughterhouse operations may add substantial coloration to water 
in receiving streams. Colored water doesn’t causes so many health problem but its aesthetically 
unacceptable. Color values vary within the range of 2 to 74 pt.co. During the study period the 
almost all water samples exceeds the permissible limit (15 pt.co) of groundwater color in 
accordance with WHO allowable limit. 
 
Table 4: Comparison of water samples with its recommend standard quality 
 
Water quality 
standard 
% of samples exceeding  
water quality Parameters Unit Max Min 
WHO BDS WHO BDS 
pH - 8.7 6.2 6.5-8.5 6.5-8.5 1 1 
Chloride mg/L 1012 160 250 600 22 76 
Iron mg/L 2.30 0.07 0.3 0.3-1 17 45 
TDS mg/L 1598 213 1000 1000 16 16 
Hardness mg/L 1094 72 - 500 - 58 
Alkalinity mg/L 560 20 250 500 3 8 
Turbidity NTU 86 0.36 5 10 2 7 
EC µS/cm 3120 320 - 1000 - 57 
Color Pt.co 74 2 15 15 32 32 
650 
 
4. Conclusions 
 
The study area covered 6 wards of KCC namely 14, 15, 16, 17, 18 and 19, and water samples 
were tested from July 10 to February 11. The study shows that, only 1% of pH value exceeds 
ECR ’97 and WHO standard. The major finding of the study was evaluating of salinity of 
groundwater and during the study period 76% samples exceeds WHO standard whereas 22% 
samples exceeds ECR ’97 allowable limits, which reveals that the study area have been facing 
tremendous salinity problem especially in non-monsoon period and water is unsuitable for 
drinking. In case of iron, 45% and 17% samples exceed WHO and ECR ’97 recommended values. 
Higher concentration of hardness (>500 mg/L) noticed in 58% of the samples, which lead to 
unsuitability of drinking. The samples exceeding WHO and ECR ’97 recommended TDS values 
is only 16% but in case of alkalinity 8% samples exceeds ECR value. In addition, about 57% 
samples are exceeding the recommended EC value by ECR ’97. The study area is good for 
turbidity as only 7% water samples exceed the recommended turbidity value throughout the study 
period though the study area possess highly colored water. Therefore, it can be concluded that the 
study area is highly associated with the salinity and iron problem, especially in dry season, which 
can cause a huge loss in forestry, agriculture, industrial sector in and around the study area as 
well as the one of the vital problem related to salinity is the deterioration of drinking water 
quality. 
 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
The authors wish to express their acknowledgements to the Department of Civil Engineering, 
Khulna University of Engineering & Technology (KUET), Bangladesh for extending all sorts of 
supports to use the laboratory facilities for this study. 
 
 
References 
 
Adhikary, S.K., Das Gupta, A. and Babel, M.S. (2011). Modeling Groundwater Flow and Salinity 
Intrusion by Advective Transport in the Regional Unconfined Aquifer of Southwest 
Bangladesh. Proc. of the 3rd Int. Conf. of EACEF (European Asian Civil Engineering Forum), 
Yogyakarta, Indonesia, September 20-22, 2011, vol. 2, pp. 91-97. 
Ahmed, M.F. and Rahman, M.M. (2000). Water Supply & Sanitation, International Training 
Network (ITN), Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technology (BUET), Bangladesh.   
Ballukayara, P.N. and Ravi, R. (1999). Characterization of Groundwater in the Unconfined 
Aquifers of Chennai City. Journal of Geological Society of India, 54: 1-11. 
Chen, J.C. and Lin, C.Y. (1995). Responses of Oxygen Consumption, Ammonia-N Excretion and 
Urea-N Excretion of Penaeus Chinensis exposed Toambient Ammonia at Different Salinity 
and pH Levels. Aquaculture, 136: 243-255. 
Clesceri, L.S., Greenberg, A.E. and Trussell, R.R. (1989). Standard Methods for the Examination 
of Water and Waste Water (17th Ed.). American Public Health Association, USA. 
ECR (Environmental Conservation Rules of Bangladesh) (1997). Environmental Conservation 
Rules, 1997. Ministry of Environment and Forest, Government of Bangladesh. 
Glynn, P.D. and Plummer, L.N., (2005). Geochemistry and Understanding of Groundwater 
Systems. Hydrogeology Journal, 13: 263-287. 
651 
 
Hassan, M.Q., Rahman, M.M., Islam, M.S. and Shamsad, S.Z.K.M. (1998). Effects of Salinity on 
the Hydrogeo-Environment of Khulna City and Mongla Port Areas of Bangladesh. Dhaka 
University Journal of Biological Sciences, 7(2): 113-127. 
Jain, C.K, Bhataia, K.K.S. and Vijay, T. (1997). Groundwater Quality in a Coastal Region of 
Andhra Pradesh. Indian Journal of Environmental Health, 39: 182-192. 
Jeevanandam, M., Kannan, R., Srinivasalu, S. and  Rammohan. V. (2007). Hydrogeochemistry 
and Groundwater Quality Assessment of Lower Part of the Ponnaiyar River Basin, Cuddalore 
District, South India. Environmental Monitoring Assessment, 132: 263–274. 
Kookana, R.S., Aylmore, L.A.G., (1994). Estimating the Pollution Potential of Pesticides to 
Groundwater. Australian Journal of Soil Research, 32: 1141–1155. 
Mirza, M.M.Q, (1996). Diversion of the Ganges Water at Farakka and Its Effects on Salinity in 
Bangladesh, Journal of Environmental Management, 22: 711-722. 
Murugesan, A., Ramu, A. and Kannan, N. (2006). Water Quality Assessment for Uttamapalayan 
Municipality in Theni District, Tamil Nadu, India. Pollution Research, 25(1): 163-166. 
Nasrin, S., Saha, S.K. and Rahman, M.M.S. (2005). Assessment of Supply Water Quality of 
Khulna City Corporation, Khulna, Bangladesh. Khulna University Studies, 6(1-2): 245-252. 
Nickson, R.T., McArthur, J.M., Shrestha, B., Kyaw-Nyint, T.O., and Lowry, D. (2005). Arsenic 
and other Drinking Water Quality Issues, Muzaffargarh District, Pakistan. Applied 
Geochemistry, 20: 55–68. 
Quddus, K.G. and Zaman, M.W. (1996). Irrigation Water Quality in Some Selected Villages of 
Meherpur in Bangladesh. Bangladesh Journal of Agricultural Sciences, 23(2): 51-57. 
Rabbi, M.F. and Ahmed, E. (1997). Environmental Degradation of the Southwest Region of 
Bangladesh and Need for a Barrage on the Ganges, Proc. of the Int. Conf. on Large Scale 
Water Resources Development in Developing Countries: New Dimension of Prospects and 
Problems, October 20-23, 1997, Kathmandu, Nepal. 
Ragunath, H.M. (1990). Groundwater, Wiley Eastern Ltd., New Delhi.  
Ramkumar, T. and Anita, M.I. (2010). Hydrogeochemical Quality of Groundwater in 
Vedaraniyam Town, Tamil Nadu, India. Research Journal of Environmental and Earth 
Sciences, 2: 44-48. 
Saleh, A., Al-Ruwaith, F. and Shehata, M. (1999). Hydrological Processes Operating within the 
Main Aquifers of Kuwait, Journal of Arid Environment, 42: 195-209. 
Shahidullah, S.M., Hakim, M.A., Alam, M.S. and Shamsuddoha, A.T.M. (2000). Assessment of 
Groundwater Quality in a Selected Area of Bangladesh. Pakistan Journal of Biological 
Sciences, 3(2): 246-249. 
WHO (World Health Organization) (2006). Guidelines for Drinking Water Quality. World Health 
Organization, Geneva, Switzerland. 
 
 
 652 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
BENEFIT AND COST ESTIMATION OF ELECTRONIC TOLL COLLECTION 
SYSTEM: A CASE STUDY FOR BHAIRAB BRIDGE 
 
  
Sardar Yafee Muntasir1, Rumman Mowla Chowdhury1, Sardar Rafee Musabbir2 and Dr. Md. 
Mizanur Rahman3 
 
 
ABSTRACT: In Bangladesh, the pay toll system in road is based on the traditional method 
which is collecting the toll by road barriers installed at the beginning of Bridges. The drivers are 
permitted to enter the bridge after paying the toll by cash or ticket. Although in this system the 
toll is collected directly from the drivers, the existence of barriers causes increased travel time, 
increased fuel consumption and consequently increased pollution in the road environment. 
Another method widely used in industrial countries is Electronic Toll Collection (ETC) system. 
This method has quite a considerable number of advantages amongst which the reduced fuel 
consumption through reduced vehicle stop times, increased vehicle speeds, reduced number of 
personnel required for running the system, reduced environmental pollution, more passenger 
comfort, reduced cash circulation and consequently integration of the financial system, may be 
mentioned. The present study is undertaken to find out the economic benefit of electronic toll 
collection system (ETC). Due to limited scope of study a particular location is selected- The 
Bhairab Bridge. Most of the values for the parameters used for calculating the benefits are taken 
from Highway Capacity Manual (HCM) and from similar studies conducted by transportation 
agencies. It has been observed in Bhairab Bridge that the average service time per vehicle with E-
pass is 2.4 seconds compared to 24 seconds for manual collection. Also mainly three types of 
benefits occur, among which the main benefit is the saving of travel time which is about 4,82,780 
travel hours. This is equivalent to saving about 3.95 crore taka yearly. There would be reduction 
of harmful gases like NOx, SOx, and CO. About 275 kg of NOX, 7000 kg of HC and about 6500 
kg of CO would be saved. Fuel saving is also an important aspect. It was found that due to 
introduction of ETC; about 11080 gallons of fuel could be saved yearly. All these would help in 
saving around 4.4 crore taka every year. A total of 4.2 crore is needed to establish a fully 
functional ETC system which can easily be done as return period is only 2 years. So the toll plaza 
at the Bhairab Bridge can easily be replaced by the ETC systems. 
 
 
                                                        
1Post Graduate Student, CE Department,BUET, Dhaka - 1000, Bangladesh. 
2Under Graduate Student, CE Department,BUET, Dhaka - 1000, Bangladesh. 
3Associate Professor, CE Department, BUET, Dhaka - 1000, Bangladesh. 
 
 653 
1.  Introduction 
 
Transportation infrastructures (roads, rail, airports and seaports) are the arteries for the free flow 
of people, goods and information; three things necessary in a manufacturing and export economy.  
The ease of transportation—in all of its forms—is the hallmark of industrialized civilization. The 
world that we live in now will most likely be impossible had it not been for innovations in 
transportation. There would not have been any great infrastructure, industrialization, or massive 
production, if transportation was incompetent. Life would not have kept up with the fast changing 
times if there were no huge trucks, bulldozers, trailers, cargo ships, or large aircrafts to carry 
them to different places. In other words, the global society would not have experienced comfort 
and convenience had it not been for advancements in the transportation sector. Today, humanity 
has technology to thank for all the wonderful things that it currently enjoys now. On the other 
hand delay and queuing problems are most common in our daily life situation, especially in 
traffic cases. Many roads and highways in Bangladesh have heavy traffic congestions due to 
driving inconvenience, such as delays and queuing problems at toll plazas. In effort to have this 
issue resolved as an innovative supervision committee, Roads and Highways Department 
encourages the use of modern technology. A country cannot become a manufacturing giant 
without well-connected inner perimeter roads linking airports, seaports and railroad stations. 
Government cannot possibly do all these without the involvement of private entrepreneurs in the 
building of transportation infrastructures, such as the management of airports, railroads, seaports, 
and state collection of tolls for the maintenance of perimeter roads and highways. 
   A toll road (or toll way, turnpike, toll highway or an express toll route) is a privately or publicly 
built road for which a driver pays a toll (a fee) for use. Structures for which tolls are charged 
include toll bridges and toll tunnels. Non-toll roads are financed using other sources of revenue, 
most typically fuel tax or general tax funds. The building or facility in which a toll is collected 
may be called a toll booth, toll house, toll plaza, toll station, toll bar or toll gate. This building is 
usually found on either side of a bridge and at exits. 
    The winner of the BCIA International Award 2003, Bhairab Bridge in Bangladesh, takes the 
Dhaka - Sylhet trunk road across the Meghna River. Benaim designed the bridge with a flexible 
substructure and a bridge superstructure that sits on large rubber bearings to isolate seismic 
forces. The vehicles moving through this Dhaka Sylhet route have to pay toll at the Bhairab 
Bridge toll plaza. But due to delay in current manual collection system, the users of this road 
normally have to face a long queue. The passengers and the transport owners have to sacrifice the 
time while the toll collection authority is being deprived of getting more tolls with in a stipulated 
time. With passage of time it is expected that more vehicle would be passing through the bridge 
and the problem of long queue would be increased. Introduction of an electric toll collection 
system may be a way to solve this problem. It would benefit all the parties concerned. The 
benefits of toll plaza can be broadly categorized by: the benefits of the toll agency, user benefits 
and social benefits. The toll agency benefits include reduction in operating cost, reduction in man 
labor, reduction in management cost and enhanced cash handling. The user benefits include time 
saving due to the elimination of the hassle of digging for change and the elimination of 
acceleration and deceleration as the vehicle do not stop for toll collection. In addition there is 
time saving due to reduced transaction time and average waiting time. Moreover, considerable 
fuel is saved due to elimination of acceleration.  
   The objectives of the research are to study the existing toll collection system at the Bhairab 
Bridge, compare various aspects of this existing system with the electronic toll collection system, 
 654 
find out the economic benefits of introducing Electronic Toll Collection System and last but not 
the least to find out the cost of establishing a full Electronic Toll Collection system replacing the 
existing one.  
 
2.  Methodology 
 
In this study, a primary survey would be conducted to observe the delay time, required 
acceleration and deceleration for various vehicles and time for transaction. A suitable 
computerized toll collection system with manual transaction would be selected. Secondary data 
of traffic flow would be collected from the toll collectors. An assessment of the existing system 
of toll plaza would be made including the operating system being used, the efficiency of toll 
collection, problem faced by the toll collectors and the road users etc. An in depth analysis of the 
Electronic Toll Collection system would then be made. Various aspects of these two systems 
would then be compared and the benefit of introducing electronic toll collection system would be 
found out in terms of saving in time, fuel and emission reduction. Also cost of establishing an 
Electronic Toll Collection System would be analyzed. A flowchart presented in annex – 1 shows 
the methodology that has been followed during this research. 
 
3. Data Analysis 
 
3.1. Calculation of total time saving (T) 
 
Total time saving is calculated as per the following formula: 
T = Time saving in Peak hours + Time saving during off peak hours. 
 
T = TP + TOP                                                                                                                                                    (1) 
 
TP   = (OF * Ts, P * DDHV * Number of Peak hours *2 *365/3600) hour                        (2) 
 
TOP = (OF * Ts, OP * AAHV * Number of off peak hours*365/3600) hour                       (3) 
 
Where, 
T           = Total time saving per vehicle 
DDHV = Directional Design Hourly Volume 
AAHV = Average Annual Hourly Volume 
OF        = Vehicle occupancy factor 
Ts, P      = Time saving for each vehicle in peak hours, in seconds 
Ts, OP     = Time saving for each vehicle in off peak hours, in seconds 
 
3.2. Vehicle occupancy factor (OF) 
 
The vehicle occupancy factor is used to determine the total time saved on an individual basis 
depending upon the vehicular distribution. Vehicle occupancy factor estimates the average 
occupancy for each vehicle. The following formula has been used to find out the vehicle 
occupancy factor: 
 
 655 
Average Occupancy factor, OF = (Sum of Average occupancy of passenger in each vehicle type 
* proportion of that vehicle type)                                                                                       (4) 
 
   Number of passenger in each vehicle varies with many factors. Different value has been found 
in different reports. The project appraisal document for the World Bank financed Clean Air and 
Sustainable Development Project of Ministry of Forest and Environment considers 2 passengers 
in each car, 25 passengers in each mini bus and 46 passengers in each large bus (The World Bank 
2009). On the other hand, Karim and others reported a value of 2.2 passengers for each car/taxi, 
36 passengers for mini bus and 52 passengers for large bus (Karim et al., 2001). Value for Trucks 
and large trailers were not available. Depending on these, the values in annex – 1 have been 
considered in this study to calculate the average vehicle occupancy factor.  
 
3.3. Travel time saving (Ts) 
 
The travel time saving for each vehicle is calculated as per the following formula:  
 
TS = (TM - TE)                                                                                                                          (5) 
 
Where, 
TM = Total time for manual transaction  
TE = Total time for Electronic transaction 
   Detail calculations of transaction time required by both manual and electronic system are 
shown in annex – 2 and annex – 3. 
 
3.4. Transaction time for manual system (TM) 
 
The total time spent in the system is the sum of the deceleration time, waiting time, toll 
processing time and the acceleration time to the average speed. The total for each of lane type can 
be estimated as follows: 
TM = Deceleration time (DT) + Average waiting time (WM) + Average service time at manual 
lane (TT) + Acceleration time to normal speed (AT).        
 
TM = DT + WM + TT + AT                                                                                                        (6) 
 
3.5. Transaction time for ETC (TE)  
 
The time taken to cover the accelerating distance, waiting distance, toll transaction and 
acceleration distance is the total time for electronic transaction. For ETC lane, the vehicles do not 
stop so there is elimination of the deceleration and acceleration. Thus the deceleration and 
acceleration distance along with the waiting distance are covered at the average road speed. The 
average car length for the design purpose is taken to be 19ft (W.S. etal., 1982), 
TE = Distance covered (D) /average speed + toll transaction time (headway) + WE (waiting time 
at ETC)                                                                                                                                                                                 (7) 
 
 
 
 656 
3.6. Fuel savings (FS) 
 
With the elimination of the deceleration, waiting, and acceleration, there is a considerable amount 
of fuel savings. The acceleration of the vehicles consumes major of the fuel and the fuel 
consumed is less during deceleration and waiting for the toll transaction. Thus the fuel used 
during the deceleration and waiting is neglected. The total fuel saving is estimated as follows: 
 
FS = Total time saving due to elimination of acceleration (Ts, a)* Average road speed for the ET 
lane / Average miles traveled per gallons.                                                                              (8)                           
     
Where, 
Ts, a = Total time saving due to elimination of acceleration (second per vehicle) 
Ts, a = [Acceleration time - (distance covered during acceleration /average speed)] sec 
 
Fs = Fs, P + Fs, OP                                                                                                                                                           (9) 
 
Where, 
Fs, P   = Fuel saving during peak hour 
Fs, OP = Fuel saving during off peak hour 
  Details calculation of fuel saving is shown in annex – 4. 
 
3.7. Emissions reduction 
 
The pollutant species most often of concern with respect to transportation facilities are carbon 
monoxide (CO), hydrocarbons (HC), photochemical oxidants e.g., ozone (O3),  nitrogen oxides 
(NOx), particulate matter (PM), and lead (Pb). The major components of the mobile emissions are 
carbon oxides (CO), nitrogen oxides (NOx), and hydrocarbon (HC) during vehicle idling and 
acceleration. There are various methods for estimating the mobile emissions. 
   During idling of the vehicles, the NOx is negligible as compared to CO and HC (Kirchstetter, et 
al. 1998). In this research, the mobile emissions have been estimated using the study done by 
Kirchstetter, et al. The financial values are evaluated using the study done by Kenneth and others 
(Kenneth, et al. 1995).Total idling time saving for the manual system,  
 
Ts, I = Ts, I, P + Ts, I, OP                                                                                                     (10)                           
 
Where, 
Ts, I, P   = Total idle time saving during peak hour 
Ts, I, OP = Total idle time saving during off-peak hour 
   Details calculation of emission reduction is shown in annex – 5. 
 
3.8. ETC installation costs 
 
In addition to the benefits resulting from the implementation of electronic toll collection, there 
are also costs. The four primary costs that have been identified include infrastructure costs, 
transponder costs, marketing costs, and maintenance and labor costs. For ease of calculation 
 657 
mainly infrastructure cost is discussed here. Also a rough estimation of transponder cost is 
shown. 
 
4. Results 
 
4.1 Total time saving 
 
After detailed calculation of time saving it was found that, time lost by each vehicle at the toll 
plaza in case of manual system during the peak hours would around 87 seconds per vehicle and 
which is 47 seconds during off-peak hours for each vehicle. On the other hand, in case of 
electronic toll collection system, this time required during peak hours is 4.15 seconds per vehicle 
while the value is 2.4 seconds per vehicle during the off-peak hours. This gives a total saving of 
around 482,780 travel hours each year when the total number of vehicle and total number of 
passengers traveling in each type of vehicle is considered. The financial value of this saving 
based on the average value of travel time was then calculated which came out as around Tk. 4.0 
crores every year. Comparison of travel time has been shown in figure 1. 
 
. 
 
Fig. 1 Travel time for each system 
 
4.2 Total fuel saving 
 
Due to the fact that ETC system allows for toll collection while the vehicles pass with normal 
speeds, the decrease/increase speed and stop incidents which lead to extra fuel consumption, will 
be eliminated.  
   In calculating the fuel saving, average miles traveled per gallon of fuel has been assumed as 
22.1 gallon. However, this figure would be different for different types of vehicle and 
consideration of this fact might produce a better result. As fuel consumption during the waiting 
time and during deceleration time is negligible, only fuel saving due to elimination of 
acceleration time has been taken into account. It was found that a total of 6.4 second could be 
saved for each vehicle due to elimination of acceleration. Due to this, a yearly saving of around 
11080 gallon of fuel would be possible with an estimated saving of Tk. 40 lakhs per year. 
   The above cost has been calculated considering petrol as fuel. However, in reality, not all the 
vehicles would be running on petrol. Now a day, a good number of vehicles use compressed 
natural gas (CNG) as fuel while the number of diesel run vehicle is also high. While it was 
 658 
extremely difficult to identify the number of vehicles using a particular type of fuel, a calculation 
was done just to see the relative cost implication if all the vehicles would use a particular type of 
fuel. In case of CNG, the concept of miles per gallon equivalent has been taken into consideration 
where one equivalent gallon is taken equal to 121.5 cubic feet of CNG (EPA, 2010) The 
comparative cost saving has been shown in figure 2. 
                   
37
19
6.75
0
20
40
Petrol Diesel CNG
Savings in lakh tk.
 
Fig. 2 Comparison of cost saving in case of different types of fuel 
 
4.3. Total emission saving 
 
Emission from vehicle depends on the type of vehicle, age of the vehicle and also on the fuel 
used. Due to limited scope of this study, an average value has been considered for emission 
reduction. It was found from the study that with the introduction of ETC, about 275 kg of NOx, 
7000 kg of HC and about 6500 kg of CO can be reduced annually. This has been shown in figure 
3. The financial value of this saving based on the average value of travel time was then calculated 
which came out as around Tk. 6.5 lakh every year.  
                               
 
 
Fig. 3 Annual Emission Reduction of Various Gases 
 
4.5. ETC installation cost 
 
3.5.1. Infrastructure costs 
There are various infrastructure costs that result when converting existing roadways and manual 
tolling facilities to ETC facilities. Clearly, converting and upgrading existing infrastructure is 
substantially cheaper than building an entirely new roadway. One study estimated that converting 
a traditional High Occupancy Vehicle (HOV) lane to a High Occupancy Toll (HOT) lane using 
ETC technologies would cost approximately $120,000 per lane-mile. The cost estimates are 
affected by the type of support and signage used. Full span structures cost more than the 
cantilever or the pole support. Typical cantilever structures would cost 70 lakh tk which covers 
one lane. So for six lanes it would take 4.20 crore for the first year for infrastructure. 
 659 
3.5.2. Transponder cost 
ETC users are usually required to purchase, rent, or place a deposit on the in-vehicle equipment. 
The cost of transponders in various systems ranges from $12 to $50.The estimation of these costs 
is also converted to BD currency which is about 4000tk. 
 
5. Major Findings 
 
From the above results, it was found that due to introduction of ETC, there will be three types of 
benefit. One of the most significant one is the saving in travel time. About 482,780 travel hours 
would be saved due to introduction of ETC with an estimated cost of about Tk. 4.0 crores every 
year. Along with this saving in travel time, there would be saving in gasoline. About 11080 
gallons of gasoline would be saved annually with an estimated cost of Tk. 38 lakh every year. 
ETC would also help in reducing emission of harmful gases. About 275kg of NOx, 7000 kg of 
HC and about 6500 kg of CO would be saved. Considering all these aspects, about 4.4 crore taka 
could be saved every year due to introduction of ETC at Bhairab toll road. Also considering only 
infrastructure costs which is about 4.20 crore taka for the first year it could be easily found that 
within 2 years total installation cost can be earned back. So it is very evident that replacing 
existing manual toll collection system with ETC will be very benefitial.  
 
6. Conclusion and Recommendations 
 
It has been observed that major benefits of introducing ETC are the time and gasoline savings. 
Although the financial value of saving emission seems low, the amount of harmful gases which 
could be saved demands attention. Thus, any reduction in travel time would have positive impact 
on our national economy. However, the estimation of the travel time saving largely depends on 
the delay model used to estimate the waiting time. Models developed specifically for toll plaza 
would certainly help the benefit model to give more accurate results. Besides the above 
mentioned benefits, ETC increases travel convenience. ETC might also help in reduction of 
corruption in case toll collection. In the recent days, even the most sophisticated toll collection 
system of Bhairab Bridge suffered corruption in toll collection. It is expected that introduction of 
ETC would help in reducing such ill practices. Some extensions that can be made to this research 
are as follows: 
1. A more comprehensive study can be undertaken by incorporating benefits due to reduction in 
corruption, elimination of tickets and reduced human resources. 
2.  A study by incorporating the value of the increased reliability due to the ETC system can also 
be undertaken. The reliability of the travel time is increased due to the ETC deployment and it 
has an impact on the value of travel time. The estimation of this factor would give better estimate 
of the travel time savings. 
3. Study the effects of other delay models on the travel time and delay estimation can also be 
undertaken. Delay model used for this research was from the Highway Capacity Manual 2000. A 
model more specific to toll plaza would give better estimate for the waiting times at the manual 
and automatic lanes. 
 
References 
Al-Deek, H.M., Mohamed, A.A., Radwan, A.E., (1997). Operational benefits of electronic toll 
collection: case study. Journal of Transportation Engineering. Volume 123 N6. 
 660 
 
Al-Deek, H.M., Mohamed A.A. and Radwan, A.E. (1997). Operational Benefits of Electronic toll 
collection: Case Study. Journal of Transportation Research, volume123 No 6, Pages 467-
477. 
Bernard, M. J. and Thorpe., (1994). "Justifying Railroad Electrification by Emissions Reduction: 
Method and Four Case Studies.” Reprint from 1994 TRB Meeting, Paper #940795. 
Burris, M. W. (2002). Lee County's variable pricing project. Institute of Transportation 
Engineers Journal. Volume 72, Issue 4, Pages 36-42. 
Karim, M. (1997). Traffic Pollution in Bangladesh & Metropolitan Dhaka a Preliminary 
Investigation. 90th Annual Meeting of Air and Waste Management Association, Toronto, 
Canada. 
           
Annex - 1: Calculation of average vehicle occupancy factor 
 
Vehicle occupancy factor was calculated to see the average number of people traveling by a 
specific type of vehicle. This was necessary to find out the total travel time that would be saved 
considering all the people traveling by road. Table 2 shows the calculation of average vehicle 
occupancy factor. 
 
Table 2 Calculation of vehicle occupancy factor 
          
Vehicle Vehicle Average Proportion Average Value of time of TV 
Class Type Occupancy of vehicle Vehicle passengers in each ( Tk per 
   class Occupancy vehicle type ( Tk hour for 
    Factor per hour) each 
    (OF)  passenger) 
Class 1 Cars 2 0.0065  79.96  
Class 2 Small Bus 30 0.0080  35.4  
Class 3 Large Bus 52 0.1540  55.28  
Class 4 Small Truck 2 0.1783  80  
Class 5 Medium 2 0.1550 9.92 80 81.74 
 Truck      
       
Class 6 Large Truck 2 0.1950  80  
Class7 Trailers 2 0.2950  100  
Class 8 Taxi 2.2 0.0082  80  
 
Source: Shafiqul Mannan, M. and M. Masud Karim (2001). Current State of the Mobility of the 
Urban Dwellers in Greater Dhaka. 94th Annual Conference and Exhibition of Air and Waste 
Management Association, Orlando, Florida, USA. 
 
 661 
Average Occupancy factor, OF = (Sum of Average occupancy of passenger in each vehicle type                                                   
* proportion of that vehicle type)          
 
It can be mentioned here that the value of passenger traveling by each type of vehicle has been 
assumed by the author for this study due to the limited scope. However, a comprehensive survey 
on this would provide more authentic information and would provide better result. Average 
vehicle occupancy was thus found as 9.92 as shown in Table. 
 
Annex - 2: Calculation of time required in case of manual system 
 
From methodology chapter, waiting time for electronic system (WM) is 
 
WM = 900 T [(XM - 1) + {(XM - 1)2 + 8 XM / C * T} ^ 0.5] 
 
Where, 
WM = incremental, or random, stopped delay (seconds/vehicle), 
 
Volume of vehicle in each of the six manual lanes (Vehicles/hour) = 105 
 
C    = capacity of lane group (vehicles/hour) 
 
       = 350 
 
XM  = volume to capacity ratio of lane group, 
 
        = 0.3 
 
 T    = Time for consideration, peak period (hours) = 3 
 
WM  = 40.00 seconds per vehicle 
 
        = 0.67 minute per vehicle  
 
TMP  = 87 seconds per vehicle during peak hour 
 
        = 1.45 min per vehicle during peak hour  
 
TMOP = 47 seconds per vehicle during off peak hours 
 
Annex - 3: Calculation of time required in case of electronic system 
 
From methodology chapter, we know that waiting time for electronic system (WE) is 
 
WE = 900 T [(XE - 1) + {(XE - 1)2 + 8 X E / CE * T} ^ 0.5] 
 
Where, 
XE = volume to capacity ratio of automatic lane      = 0.07 
 
CE = capacity of automatic lane (vehicles/hour)       = 1500 
 662 
 
T   = Time for consideration, peak period, (hours)   = 3 
 
Volume of traffic (vehicle per hour)                         = 105 
 
Vehicle arrival rate                                                    = 625 vehicle per hour 
 
AADT = 8677 
 
K = the proportion of the daily traffic occurring during the peak hour = 0.12 
 
D = the proportion of peak hour traffic traveling in the peak direction = 0.60 
 
DDHV= 625 
 
Hourly Volume of Traffic, AAHV = 180.78 
 
Occupancy Factor, OF = 9.92 
 
Average value of travel time, TV = 81.74 Tk per hour 
 
WE = 1.6 seconds per vehicle = 0.03 Minute per vehicle 
 
Transaction time at manual (TE) considering all the parameters are determined as follows: 
 
 TE = (0.14 + 0.004 * QM) + 2.4 + WE 
 
Vehicle arrival rate per hour = 105 
 
Average queue length QM = lM /3600 * WM = DDHV * WM / 6 * 3600 = 1.16  
 
TEP    = 4.15 seconds per vehicle during peak hour = 0.07 min/vehicle 
 
TEOP = 2.40 seconds during off peak hour 
 
Time Saving for each vehicle during peak hour, TS, P  = 82.85 Sec during peak hours 
        = 1.38 minute = 0.023 hour 
 
Time Saving for each vehicle during off peak hour,  
 
TS, OP = 44.60 seconds during off peak Hour 
 
Total time saving (T) = {(OF * TS, P * DDHV * 2 * 3 * 365) + (OF * TS, OP * AAHV *24 * 365)} 
 
= {9.92 * 82.85 * (625 * 2) * 3 * 365} + {9.92 * 44.60 * 180.78 * 21 * 365} 
 
= 1.738 * 109 man sec 
 
= 482,780 man hours 
 663 
 
= 20116 man days  
 
Total annual value of time saving = 482,780 man hr * 87.74 Tk. 
                                         
                                                      = 3,94,62,450.79 Tk. 
                                     
Annex - 4: Calculation of fuel saving 
 
Number of gallons saved (FS) 
 
FS      = Total time saving due to elimination of acceleration (Ts, a) * road speed for the ET lane / 
average miles traveled per gallons. 
 
FS       = {(Ts, a * DDHV * 2 * Number of peak hours * 365 * 50mph / 22.1 mpg) + 
              (Ts, a * ADHV * Number of off peak hours * 365 * 50mph / 22.1 mpg)}/3600 
 
TS, A = Acceleration time - (distance covered during acceleration / average speed) 
 
As discussed in the previous section, the accelerating time (AT) is 10 seconds and the distance 
traveled (SD) to the average road speed is calculated as follows: 
 
v2 = 2 * a * SD 
 
SD = 502 / (2 * 5) 
 
SD = 250ft  
 
SD = 0.05 miles 
 
The distance traveled (SD) to the average road speed is 0.05 miles. 
 
Ts, a = AT - (SD / average road speed) 
 
Ts, a =10 - ((0.05 / 50) * 3600) = 10 - 3.6 
 
Ts, a = 6.4 seconds per vehicle 
 
FS       = {(6.4 * 625 * 2 * 3 * 365 * 50mph / 22.1 mpg) + (6.4 * 180.78 * 21 * 365 * 50mph / 22.1 
mpg)}/3600 
 
           = 11078.65 gallons 
 
Cost of Fuel (FC) is assumed to be 340 Tk per gallon 
 
Total financial value of the Fuel saved 
 
= Cost of Fuel per gallons (Tk. 340) * total number of Fuel saved  
 
 664 
= 37,67,200 Tk   
 
Annex - 5: Calculation of emission saving 
 
Number of gallons saved, FS = 11080 gallons 
 
Total number of vehicle = DDHV = 625  
 
Emission saving due to reduction in idle time 
 
Total idling time saving for the manual, TS, I = TS, I, P + TS, I, OP 
 
Idling time saving for each vehicle = tS, I 
 
tS, I = (WM + TT) - (WE + 2.4), in second 
 
tS, I = (WM + 24) - (WE + 2.4)  
 
tS, I = WM - WE + 21.6 
 
Total idling time saving during peak hour,       TS, I, P     = tS, I * DDHV * 3 * 2 * 365  
 
Total idling time saving during off peak hour, TS, I, OP = tS, I * AAH V * 21 * 365 
 
tS, I = WM - WE + 21.6 = 60 seconds per vehicle  
 
TS, I = 165265722 seconds = 2754428.7 min = 45907.15 hour 
 
During idling of vehicle, NOX emission is negligible and only CO and HC would be taken into 
account. 
 
Amount of CO saved due to idling reduction, COi (grams) = 1.5* Ts, I 
 
= 4131643.05 grams 
 
= 4131.643 kg 
 
Amount of HC saved due to idling reduction, HCi (grams) = 2.5* Ts, I  
 
= 6886071.75 grams = 6886.072 kg 
 
During Acceleration of vehicle 
 
NOX (A) (grams) = 24.7 grams/gallons * number of gallons of fuel saved. 
 
NOX (A) = 24.7 * (FS)  
 
                = 273676 grams = 273.676 kg 
 
 665 
HC (A) = 9.5 * (Fs)  
 
             = 105260 grams = 105.26 kg 
 
CO (A) = 209 * (Fs)  
 
             = 2315720 grams = 2315.72 kg 
  
Where, 
 
NOX (A) = NOX reduction due to elimination of acceleration or fuel savings 
 
 HC (A) = HC reduction due to elimination of acceleration or fuel savings  
 
CO (A) = CO reduction due to elimination of acceleration or fuel savings 
 
Assumed value of emission saving 
 
$0.0063 /Kg for CO = 0.4473 tk / kg 
 
$ 1.28/Kg for HC     = 90.88 tk / kg 
 
$1.28/Kg for NOX      = 90.88 tk / kg 
 
 
Elements 
Total 
emission 
saving (kg) 
Value of per 
kg reduction 
Total Saving (Tk) in 
Lakh Taka 
NOX 273.676 90.88 0.24 
HC 6991.332 90.88 6.35 
CO 6447.363 0.4473 0.0288 
Total 6.63 
  
 
666 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
EVALUATING SURFACE WATER QUALITY OF MAGURA MUNICIPALITY AREA, 
BANGLADESH 
 
 
Farzina Akter1 and A. K. Azad2 
 
 
ABSTRACT: An extensive study was carried out to determine the physico-chemical parameters 
of surface water and to evaluate their suitability for various purposes in the Magura municipality 
area of Magura district. For conducting this study, surface water samples were collected from 
twenty seven sampling sites (twenty four pond water samples and three river water samples) 
during both dry and wet season of the year 2011. Collected samples were analyzed by using the 
procedure outlined in the standard methods. Results of this research reveal that the surface water 
in the study area is unsuitable for drinking uses because of the high values of total suspended 
solids, potassium concentration, fecal pollution and lower values of DO than the standards or 
guidelines for drinking uses. This study also explicit that surface water can be used for some 
selective domestic purposes but not all domestic purposes because of the higher fecal pollution of 
water and this waster is also suitable for wood chemical industries and after the primary treatment 
this water could be used for many other industries.  The surface water in the area studied is 
suitable or almost excellent for being used for irrigation because Electrical Conductivity (EC), 
Sodium Adsorption Ratio (SAR), Soluable Sodium Percentage (SSP), Residual Sodium 
Bicarbonate (RSBC) and other contents (except potassium concentration) of surface water in the 
study area satisfy the national and international guideline for irrigation water quality.  
 
Keywords: Surface Water Quality, Drinking, Domestic and irrigation use. 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Water is vital to the existence of all living organisms, but this valued resource is increasingly 
being threatened as human populations grow and demand more water in our daily life. In 
Bangladesh, like many developing countries, there is a great demand for safe water. Water is 
available in country apparently almost everywhere but availability of safe water is the prime 
                                                        
1MS Student, Environmental Science Discipline, Khulna University, Khulna-9208, Bangladesh; Email: 
rimi_aktar@yahoo.com.au.  
2Professor, Environmental Science Discipline, Khulna University, Khulna-9208, Bangladesh; Email: 
azad_ku@yahoo.com.  
 
667 
 
questions. Today, Magura municipality is facing the same problem. About 97,802 people lived in 
Magura municipality and its area is 47.31 sq. km. About 114 pond water bodies and 1 river are 
present in this area. The population of this area is increasing day by day. In order to meet the ever 
increasing demand, most of the people of the municipality area depend upon ground water 
However, this ground water sources is limited in supply. In most parts of the municipality area, 
the ground water abstraction exceeds the recharge rate, causing the ground water to be mined 
systematically and be depleted of its finite reserve. A sustainable solution is needed. This implies 
a conjunctive use of groundwater and surface water in order to maintain the balance between 
anthropogenic demand and water’s natural availability. Arsenic contamination of ground water is 
another problem for municipal dwellers to use the ground water for various purposes. In 1998, 
British Geological Survey (BGS) collected 2022 water samples from 41 arsenic-affected districts. 
Laboratory tests revealed that 19 Percentage of groundwater from the shallow aquifer (less than 
150 m deep) exceeding the Bangladesh standard for arsenic of 0.05 mg/L in Magura district 
(Smith et al., 2000). To avoid arsenic contamination, municipal dwellers use surface water for 
various purposes in their daily life is an alternative option. On the other hand, surface water 
bodies in this area become contaminated by organic manure, municipal waste, some fungicides, 
agricultural runoff and industrial effluent etc. Since contaminated water can pose a potential 
source of health risk to municipality dwellers. So, Magura municipality faces an acute shortage of 
safe water. If the surface water can be used for various purposes then the problem will be reduced 
and then that will help to reduce pressure on ground water with supply water demand can be 
ensured. Measurements of various surface water quality parameters play the key role in detecting 
the status of pollution and suitability of a particular water body for various purposes. So, at the 
present situation physicochemical characteristics of surface water in the magura municipality area 
is very much important. This study determines the present surface water quality in the Magura 
municipality area and to evaluate the surface water quality to be used for various purposes. 
 
 
2. Methodology 
 
2.1 Sample collection and analysis 
  
Surface water samples from different ponds and the river were collected for this study. Sample 
collection points are shown in Figure 1. Samples were collected in plastic bottles cleaned by 
rinsing thoroughly with 8M HNO3, followed by repeated washing with distilled water. Multiple 
samples were collected from the same spot at two seasons to study the seasonal variation of the 
results. Three to four sub samples of equal volume were collected from different position in each 
sampling spot. Water samples were collected from 1m below of the surface water layer. The sub 
samples of each sampling spot were mixed well and a sample of 2 L was collected in sampling 
bottles and then securely sealed with proper leveling (sample number and location). Aeration 
during sampling was avoided as far as possible. Twenty four pond water samples and three river 
water samples were collected for this study in each season. Winkler’s bottles were used to collect 
samples for BOD measurements and water samples for Iron measurement were collected in 
plastic containers acidified with 4-5 drops of HNO3 (0.01N) to prevent precipitation. 
Temperature, Transparency, pH, Electrical conductivity (EC), Total dissolved solids (TDS), 
Dissolved oxygen (DO) were measured at the sampling site. Other parameters were analysed 
668 
 
immediately after sample collection at the laboratory. For chemical analysis, standard 
preservation techniques and methods (Greenberg, et. al., 1992 and Ramesh and Anbu, 1996) of 
analysis were used.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Sampling location map of the surface water in the study area 
 
    Data were analysed by Excel 2000 software and Minitab pro 16 software was used for 
statistical analysis. Different parameters of water quality were analyzed by the following 
methods: A glass thermometer was used for the measurement of temperature. Transparency was 
measured by Sacchi disc. pH, EC and TDS were measured at the sampling site by H1-9635, 
Microprocessor Conductivity/TDS meter. Measurement of DO was done by Dissolved oxygen 
meter (Model: PDO-519) at the sampling site. Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) was 
measured from the differences of initial and 5 days DO by DO meter. Salinity was measured by 
Conductivity meter (model, HI-8033). Bicarbonate was measured by Potentiometric titration 
method. Sodium and Potassium were measured by Flame photometric method (Flame 
photometer- models PEP 7 and PEP 7/C). Calcium and Magnesum were measured by Titrimetric 
method, Chloride was measured by Mohr’s titration method, Ortho-Phosphate and Sulphate were 
measured by Turbidimetric method (Thermo spectronic, UV-visible Spectrophotometers), Nitrate 
was measured by Ultraviolet spectrophotometric screening method, Iron was measured by 
Phenanthroline method ( using  Spectrophotometer, model-Hach/DR/2400). Coli form was 
measured by Multiple tube fermentation procedure (Pal, 1994). 
669 
 
2.2 Equations of data analysis 
 
Irrigation water quality was judged by some determining factors such as Sodium Absorption 
Ratio (SAR), Soluble Sodium Percentage (SSP), Residual Sodium Bicarbonate (RSBC), Total 
hardness (Ht) etc were calculated by using the following recommended relationships. 
 
SAR was calculated by the following equation given by Richards (1954), 
 
SAR=





 
2
MgCa
Na                                                                                                                (1)
  
SSP was calculated by the following equation by Todd (1980), 
 
SSP=
 
KNaMgCa
KNa

 100
                                                                                                       (2)
  
The RSBC was calculated according to Gupta and Gupta (1987), 
 
RSBC = HCO3 - Ca                                                                                   (3) 
 
The TH was calculated by the following equation by Raghunath (1987), 
 
TH= (Ca + Mg) x 50                                                                                                                      (4)
   
Where, all the ionic concentrations are expressed in milli-equivalents per litre (meq/L). 
 
 
3. Results and Discussion 
 
3.1 Surface water chemistry in magura municipality 
 
The surface water chemistry may be derived from nature or anthropogenic sources i.e. waste, 
excessive fertilizer in crop field, acid precipitation etc. Table 1 and Table 2 represent the physico-
chemical properties of the surface water during dry season and wet season in magura 
municipality where major ions are represent in mg/L. The average value of total coliform in pond 
water is 854.17/100 ml and in river water 2100/100 ml during dry season and in the wet season 
this values are 1512.5/100 ml in pond water and 2900/100 ml in river water. In pond water the 
average values of fecal coliform are 366.67/100 ml and 566.67/100 ml and in river water 600/100 
ml and 766.67/100 ml during dry season and wet season respectively. 
 
 
 
670 
 
3.2 Evaluation of surface water for drinking purposes 
 
Generally, water for drinking purposes should be colourless, odourless, free from turbidity, clear 
and free from excessive dissolved solids, and free from pathogenic organisms. Compare of the 
study area water quality with the water quality guidelines and standards for drinking uses by 
international organization or country are shown in Table 3. This table shows that in the study area 
the average value of pH in pond water during the dry season is slightly acidic and do not fall 
within the acceptable limit for drinking uses but rest of the time in the year, pond and river water  
 
Table 1 The physico- chemical parameters of the collected water samples from Magura 
municipality during dry season 
 
Physical Parameters Cations Anion Trace  
S/N 
pH
 
EC
 (µ
S/
cm
) 
T
em
pe
ra
tu
re
 
(o
C
) 
T
ra
ns
pa
re
nc
y 
(c
m
) 
D
O
 (p
pm
) 
BO
D
 (p
pm
) 
T
D
S 
(p
pm
) 
T
SS
 (p
pm
) 
TS
 (p
pm
) 
Sa
lin
ity
 (p
pt
) 
N
a+
 (p
pm
) 
C
a2
+ 
(p
pm
) 
M
g2
+ 
(p
pm
) 
K
+ 
(p
pm
) 
PO
43
- (
pp
m
) 
H
C
O
3-
 (p
pm
) 
C
l- 
(p
pm
) 
N
O
3-
 (p
pm
) 
SO
42
- (
pp
m
) 
Fe
 (p
pm
) 
1 6.2 332 25.6 28.2 4.8 0.9 230 90 320 0.2 25.4 21.9 9.3 12.9 0.5 98.3 25.7 4.8 26.9 0.1 
2 6.4 455 25.9 27.5 4.6 0.8 270 120 390 0.3 31.9 27.0 12.3 15.7 2.0 91.1 38.7 7.3 36.5 0.1 
3 6.5 513 25.7 27.9 4.7 1.1 315 130 445 0.3 38.4 30.9 13.5 16.2 0.7 131.9 40.2 5.1 34.7 0.1 
4 6.3 467 25.6 28.8 4.9 1.2 314 110 424 0.3 29.6 29.1 13.9 16.8 2.1 135.8 39.8 5.8 33.5 0.1 
5 7 595 25.9 27.5 4.3 1 354 150 504 0.3 42.7 35 17.0 19.8 2.0 137.9 47.6 4.3 39.5 0.1 
6 6.3 816 26 25.1 3.9 1 533 240 773 0.3 69 40.9 21.6 33.1 0.8 238.5 69.5 7.6 43 0.1 
7 6.4 712 25.7 27.3 4.7 1.6 448 120 568 0.3 53.2 36.0 19.4 26.4 1 203.8 53.7 4.1 40.2 0.1 
8 6.3 519 25.9 28.8 4.9 1.5 352 100 452 0.2 28.4 31 18.5 18.8 0.9 171.1 28.8 3.4 41.9 0.1 
9 6.1 326 25.8 29.0 5 1.1 215 50 265 0.1 19.9 24 8.8 10.8 0.7 92 18.3 3.4 31.1 0.0 
10 5.9 303 26 30.5 5.2 1.2 208 40 248 0.1 22.3 18.0 8.4 10.2 0.6 87.8 20.8 4.8 27.9 0.0 
11 6.3 436 26.2 28.0 4.8 0.9 271 90 361 0.3 31.5 26 12.6 16.1 2.0 97.5 35.7 6.8 33.1 0.1 
12 6.3 480 25.9 26.8 4.6 1 347 140 487 0.2 39.4 30.8 13.2 19.9 1.5 155.6 37.5 8.2 34.3 0.1 
13 6.2 402 25.7 27.5 4.8 1.4 281 110 391 0.2 31.9 26 11.0 17.2 1.3 117.8 30.8 6.8 30.3 0.1 
14 6.3 514 26.1 26.3 5 1.5 335 110 445 0.3 38.1 30.9 14.1 18.1 2.2 152 37.3 4.8 31.4 0.1 
15 6.2 494 25.9 28.5 4.7 0.8 325 80 405 0.2 35.6 30.0 13.8 17.4 1.2 147.7 36.9 4.1 31 0.1 
16 6.0 818 26 27.0 4.1 1 510 190 700 0.4 68.5   40 22.0 30.0 3.4 213.6 74.1 4.9 44.9 0.1 
17 6.3 263 25.8 30.3 5.1 0.9 165 40 205 0.1 15.8 16.0 9.6 8.4 0.8 66.6 13.1 3.0 25.1 0.0 
18 6.4 355 26.3 29.5 4.9 1.1 230 70 300 0.2 23.6 23.1 10.1 12.8 0.9 94.8 26.8 3.5 28.9 0.0 
19 6.2 380 26.5 28.0 4.8 1 240 80 320 0.2 25.0 25 11.0 12.9 1.4 102 27.8 3.4 28.9 0.1 
20 6.6 381 26.2 27.6 4.7 0.8 259 70 329 0.2 24.2 26 13.0 10.2 1.7 117.7 27.7 3.4 27.1 0.1 
21 6.3 468 25.9 29.8 4.7 1 296 90 386 0.2 31.7 28.0 14 16.6 1.5 129.4 33.8 3.7 31.3 0.1 
22 6.6 709 26.3 25.6 4 1.1 451 200 651 0.3 63.9 34.9 16.1 27.9 2.1 189.7 66.8 6.7 36.8 0.1 
23 6.4 615 25.8 26.8 4.2 1.2 428 180 608 0.3 55.4 32.0 17.2 24.5 1.3 200.3 53.5 3.7 33.8 0.1 
24 6.5 690 26 27.1 4.4 1.2 445 180 625 0.3 58.2 34 18.4 25.9 1.5 203.1 59.7 3.4 35.5 0.1 
Ave 6.3 501.8 26 27.9 4.7 1.1 325.9 115.8 441.8 0.2 37.6 29 14.1 18.3 1.4 140.7 39.4 4.9 33.7 0.1 
Max 7 818 26.5 30.5 5.2 1.6 533 240 773 0.4 68.9 40.9 22.0 33.1 3.4 238.5 74.1 8.2 44.9 0.1 
Min 5.9 263 25.6 25.1 3.9 0.8 165 40 205 0.1 15.8 16 8.4 8.4 0.5 66.6 13.1 3.0 25.1 0.0 
Po
nd
 
Stdev 0.2 157.4 0.23 1.4 0.3 0.2 99 52.4 148.5 0.1 15.7 6.2 3.9 6.6 0.7 47.4 16.3 1.6 5.4 0.0 
25 6.5 536 26.9 35.5 5.7 1.3 343 470 813 0.3 39.4 31 14.8 19.2 1.3 154.8 37.3 4.1 35.1 0.2 
26 6.6 519 25.4 34.8 5.9 1.2 337 440 777 0.2 37.9 29.0 14 18.4 1.2 160.4 32.2 3.3 31.1 0.2 
27 6.6 511 26.1 37.3 5.4 1.3 331 490 821 0.2 38.1 28.0 14.2 18.3 0.9 156.8 33.8 3.6 30.7 0.1 
Ave 6.6 522 26.1 35.9 5.7 1.3 337 466.7 803.7 0.2 38.5 29.4 14.3 18.6 1.1 157.4 34.4 3.7 32.3 0.1 
Max 6.6 536 26.9 37.3 5.9 1.3 343 490 821 0.3 39.4 31 14.8 19.2 1.3 160.4 37.3 4.1 35.1 0.2 
Min 6.5 511 25.4 34.8 5.4 1.2 331 440 777 0.2 37.9 28 14 18.3 0.9 154.8 32.2 3.3 30.7 0.1 
R
iv
er
 
Stdev 0.1 12.8 0.75 1.3 0.3 0.1 6 25.2 23.44 0.1 0.8 1.5 0.4 0.5 0.2 2.8 2.6 0.4 2.4 0.1 
 
671 
 
are contain the acceptable limit of pH for drinking purposes. DO is another important water 
quality parameter. 
    In the whole year, pond and river water in the study area reflect lower values of DO than the 
acceptable limit for drinking uses. The surface water in the study area during the both season is 
unsuitable for drinking uses due to the very high values of total suspended solids than the 
acceptable limits. The water in the pond and river also show higher concentration of potassium 
than the acceptable limit for drinking uses in the whole year. The excessive amount of potassium 
may prove detrimental to the human nervous and digestive systems. Other chemical constituents  
    
Table 2 The physico- chemical parameters of the collected water samples from Magura 
municipality during wet season 
 
Physical Parameters Cations Anion Trace  
S/N 
pH
 
EC
 (µ
S/
cm
) 
T
em
pe
ra
tu
re
 
(o
C
) 
T
ra
ns
pa
re
nc
y 
(c
m
) 
D
O
 (p
pm
) 
BO
D
 (p
pm
) 
T
D
S 
(p
pm
) 
T
SS
 (p
pm
) 
TS
 (p
pm
) 
Sa
lin
ity
 (p
pt
) 
N
a+
 (p
pm
) 
C
a2
+ 
(p
pm
) 
M
g2
+ 
(p
pm
) 
K
+ 
(p
pm
) 
PO
43
- (
pp
m
) 
H
C
O
3-
 (p
pm
) 
C
l- 
(p
pm
) 
N
O
3-
 (p
pm
) 
SO
42
- (
pp
m
) 
Fe
 (p
pm
) 
1 6.7 298 32 22.7 3.9 2 209 130 339 0.1 22.2 20 8.8 11.3 0.1 106.8 13.8 1.2 22.6 0.1 
2 6.6 260 33 19.5 3.8 2.2 182 170 352 0.1 18.3 16 7.0 8.5 0.7 98.6 10.0 1.2 20.4 0.1 
3 6.8 388 32.2 17.4 3.6 2.1 281 190 471 0.2 27.1 22.0 11.1 14.2 0.5 140.9 26.3 3.8 29.6 0.1 
4 6.7 382 32.5 21.1 3.7 2 267 180 447 0.1 27.3 23.5 10.2 12. 0.7 142.6 16.4 2 25.9 0.1 
5 7.7 382 31 20.8 3.3 2.2 267 210 477 0.1 26.6 25 9.8 12.1 1.1 146.1 17.4 1.8 25.6 0.1 
6 6.5 657 32 18.2 2.9 2 461 290 751 0.3 51.8 33.0 17.6 26.2 0.5 245.7 46.3 4.8 29.8 0.2 
7 6.6 460 32.5 22 3 1.8 373 240 613 0.1 28.9 27 14.9 16.4 0.5 211.3 26.6 2.9 29.5 0.1 
8 6.9 451 33 18.7 3.4 2 317 220 537 0.1 23.2 31.0 15.4 11.2 0.5 181.9 21.5 1.8 27 0.1 
9 6.7 276 31 21.5 3.9 2.2 193 130 323 0.1 13.8 20 8.6 9.0 0.5 103.1 11.2 2.7 21.2 0.1 
10 6.6 243 32 22.5 4.1 2.2 171 110 281 0.1 13.0 18.0 7.8 6 0.3 93.6 10.8 2.5 18.7 0.1 
11 6.7 375 30 19.5 3.9 2 233 150 383 0.2 25.9 24 10.6 12.8 1.3 106.2 24.6 3.9 23.6 0.1 
12 7.1 448 31 20.5 3.7 1.9 315 210 525 0.2 31.5 26.9 11.5 16.6 0.9 167.9 25.4 4.4 26.8 0.1 
13 7.0 341 30.2 18.2 3.4 1.8 239 230 469 0.1 20.5 24 9.5 9.8 0.7 126.9 18.5 2.2 24.2 0.1 
14 6.4 412 30.7 20.3 3.5 1.8 328 200 528 0.2 33.1 27.0 11.8 15.1 0.4 175.7 26.9 2.8 27.7 0.1 
15 6.8 419 31 22.5 3.9 2.1 293 180 473 0.2 27.2 28 12.2 12.3 0.4 155.9 23.9 2.8 28.1 0.1 
16 6.9 724 30.5 17.7 3.1 1.9 458 260 718 0.3 55.4 35 19.4 29.1 2.4 222.3 52.8 2.1 37.1 0.2 
17 6.7 221 30.2 19.5 4.2 2.2 155 100 255 0.1 13.5 15.0 7.4 6.6 0.3 78.3 9.2 2.4 20.5 0.1 
18 6.9 294 30.8 22.5 4 2.1 206 120 326 0.1 18.5 21.1 8.8 7.6 0.3 111.3 12.8 0.6 21.1 0.1 
19 6.8 313 30 17.7 4.1 2.2 219 130 349 0.1 19.1 23 10.0 10.1 1.0 110.3 17.0 2.1 25.2 0.1 
20 6.9 345 32 20.8 3.9 2.1 242 140 382 0.1 20.5 24.0 11 8.5 1.1 130.4 18.3 2.6 25.5 0.1 
21 6.7 372 33 19.5 3.7 1.8 261 150 411 0.1 19 26.9 12.7 13.2 0.6 140.6 17.8 2.6 27.1 0.1 
22 6.8 558 32.2 20.0 2.9 1.9 390 270 660 0.3 44.8 31.1 14 22.6 0.7 199.6 42.2 3.8 30.4 0.2 
23 7 569 31 20 3 2.1 398 280 678 0.3 40.4 30 16.0 23.7 0.7 212.5 39.7 2.7 30.6 0.2 
24 6.9 560 31.3 20.3 3.2 1.9 395 270 665 0.3 41.1 30.0 16.2 22.2 0.5 211.4 40.7 2.2 29.6 0.2 
Ave 6.8 406.2 31.5 20.1 3.6 2.0 285.5 190 475.5 0.2 27.6 25.1 11.8 14.1 0.7 150.8 23.8 2.6 26.2 0.2 
Max 7.7 724 33 22.7 4.2 2.2 461 290 751 0.3 55.4 35 19.4 29.1 2.4 245.7 52.8 4.8 37.1 0.2 
Min 6.4 221 30 17.4 2.9 1.8 155 100 255 0.1 13.0 15.0 7.0 6 0.1 78.3 9.2 0.6 18.7 0.1 
Po
nd
 
Stdev 0.3 129.9 1 1.6 0.4 0.1 88.9 58.3 144.1 0.1 11.6 5.2 3.4 6.4 0.5 47.3 12.2 1.0 4.2 0.01 
25 6.7 446 31 27.4 4.4 2.3 313 610 923 0.17 32.5 26 12.4 17.6 0.5 165.7 27.3 2.9 25.7 0.3 
26 6.8 455 32.1 30.8 4.7 2.4 318 580 898 0.2 33.4 26 12.9 15.4 0.9 172.9 25.8 3 24.8 0.26 
27 6.8 452 31.6 26.5 4.1 2 316 650 966 0.15 33.0 25.7 12 16.1 0.5 168.5 27.3 2.8 25.5 0.31 
Ave 6.8 451 31.6 28.2 4.4 2.2 315.7 613.3 929 0.13 33 25.9 12.4 16.4 0.6 169.0 26.8 2.9 25.3 0.3 
Max 6.8 455 32.1 30.8 4.7 2.4 318 650 966 0.17 33.4 26 12.9 17.6 0.9 172.9 27.3 3 25.7 0.31 
Min 6.7 446 31 26.5 4.1 2 313 580 898 0.15 32.5 25.7 12 15.4 0.5 165.7 25.8 2.8 24.8 0.26 
R
iv
er
 
Stdev 0.1 4.58 0.6 2.3 0.3 0.2 2.52 35.1 34.4 0.01 0.5 0.2 0.5 1.1 0.2 3.63 0.9 0.1 0.5 0.01 
 
672 
 
of surface water in the study area remain within the acceptable limit for drinking purposes during 
the both seasons. 
    The worst bacterial quality was found in all samples. According to the all international and 
national regulations and guidelines, the acceptable limit of total and fecal coliform in drinking 
water is 0/100 ml. So, all samples show very much higher value than all the regulation and 
guidelines for drinking water. In the study area, 91.67% pond water and 100% river water 
samples show category D ( high risk) and 8.33% pond water samples show category E ( very 
high risk) in the wet seasons and during the dry season all samples showed category D 
(According to DPHE, 2005). 
 
Table 3 Compare of the study area water quality with the water quality guidelines and standards 
            for drinking uses by international organization or country 
 
 
Pa
ra
m
et
er
 (U
ni
ts
) 
Te
m
pe
ra
tu
re
 (o
C
) 
pH
 
D
is
so
lv
ed
 O
xy
ge
n 
(D
O
) 
(m
g/
L
) 
To
ta
l D
is
so
lv
ed
 S
ol
id
s 
(T
D
S)
(m
g/
L)
 
T
ot
al
 S
us
pe
nd
ed
 S
ol
id
s 
( T
SS
)(
m
g/
L
) 
So
di
um
 (N
a+
) 
(m
g/
L
) 
Po
ta
ss
iu
m
 (K
+ )
 
(m
g/
L
) 
C
al
ci
um
(C
a2
+ )
 
(m
g/
L
) 
M
ag
ne
si
um
(M
g2
+ )
 
(m
g/
L
) 
C
hl
or
id
e(
C
l- )
 
(m
g/
L
) 
N
itr
at
e 
(N
O
3-
) 
(m
g/
L
) 
Su
lp
ha
te
(S
O
42
) 
(m
g/
L
) 
Ph
os
ph
at
e(
PO
43
-) 
( m
g/
L
) 
Ir
on
 (F
e)
 
(m
g/
L
) 
1Bangladesh (Standards) 20-30 6.5-8.5 6 1000 10 200 12 75 30-35 150-600∞ 10 400 6 0.3-1 
2WHO (guidelines)  *  1000 * 200  *  250  250  # 
2EuropeanUnion  
(Standards) 
 #  # # 200    250 50 250  0.2 
 
2Canada  (guidelines)      200    250 50 250  0.2 
2Australia  (guidelines)  6.5-8.5  &  180    250  500  0.3 
2NewZealand (guidelines)           50   0.0 1 
2Japan  (Standards)  5.8-8.6    200  300 300 200    0.3 
G
ui
de
lin
es
 a
nd
 S
ta
nd
ar
ds
 
2UnitedStates (Standards)  6.5-8.5  500      250 10 250  0.3 
Pond water 25.95 6.33 4.66 325.92 115.83 37.64 18.27 29.02 14.11 39.35 4.88 33.65 1.42 0.08 
D
ry
 
Se
as
on
 
River water 26.13 6.56 5.67 337 466.67 38.47 18.63 29.35 14.32 34.42 3.67 32.28 1.13 0.14 
Pond  water 31.46 6.80 3.59 285.54 190 27.62 14.05 25.06 11.76 23.75 2.56 26.15 0.69 0.12 
3 A
ve
ra
ge
 
V
al
ue
s 
st
ud
ar
ea
 
W
et
 
Se
as
on
 
River water 31.57 6.78 4.4 315.67 613.33 32.98 16.36 25.89 12.44 26.78 2.88 25.30 0.62 0.29 
(Sources: 1ECR, (1997); 2Bhardwaj et al., (2006); 3 Present study) 
Note: *: no guideline; #: not mentioned; &: acceptable to consumers no abnormal changes; ∞:  For Coastal 
Areas of Bangladesh, in case of non-availability of alternative sources value is 1000. 
 
3.3 Evaluation of surface water for domestic uses 
 
Generally, domestic purposes of water including washing of cloths, dishes, bathing and others. 
Some water quality parameter standards for domestic water uses are shown in Table 4.  
 
This table reflects that all water samples in both seasons in the study area satisfy the domestic 
water uses standards based on physico-chemical characteristics of surface water. But these water 
samples are failed to satisfy the permissible limits of total coliform in water according to 
Bangladesh water quality standard for surface water for domestic uses and that limit is 50 or less 
per 100ml. According to the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment Water 
Quality Control Commission, 2009 regulations, all of the samples in the study area are consider 
673 
 
as cless 2 water based on the presence of fecal coliform and that water can used for secondary 
contact such as fishing, water side recreation etc. 
 
Table 4 Some water quality parameter standards for domestic water uses 
 
¤Average Values in the study area 
Dry Season Wet Season 
Parameter Unit  Standard values of   
parameters 
Pond water River water Pond 
water 
River 
water 
< 300 Excellent 
300-600 Good 
600-900 Fair 
900-1200 Poor 
*Total Dissolved solids 
(TDS) 
ppm 
>1200 Unacceptable 
325.92 337 285.54 315.67 
#Chloride (Cl-) ppm 250 39.35 34.42 23.75 26.78 
≤120 Excellent 
120-500 permissible 
∞Total Hardness ppm 
>500 unsuitable 
130.5 132.17 110.96 115.83 
Sources: * Ahmed and Rahman, (2003); #Ramesh and Anbu, (1996); ∞Taha, et.al, (2003); ¤Present study. 
     
3.4 Evaluation of surface water for industrial purposes 
 
The water demands for industries depend upon the specific of each particular industry. Some 
industries require pure water, whereas others may require some specific minerals to be absent. 
The National Academy of Science and National Academy of Engineering (1972) and Hem (1989) 
provided international standards for some industrial projects that shown in Table 5.  
Table 5 Water quality requirements for some industries as proposed by NASNA E (1972) and 
              Hem (1989) 
Parameters Ca2+ Mg2+ HCO3- Cl- SO42- NO3- Fe TH TDS pH 
Units mg/L mg/L mg/L mg/L mg/L mg/L mg/L mg/L mg/L  
Textiles 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 25 100 - 
Chemical pulp and paper 20 12 0.0 200 0.0 0.0 0.5 100 0.0 6-10 
Wood chemicals 100 50 250 500 100 5 0.3 900 1000 6.5-8 
Synthetic rubber 80 36 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 01 350 0.0 6.2-8.3 
Soft drinks bottling 100 0.0 0.0 500 0.0 0.0 0.3 0.0 0.0 - 
Petroleum products 75 30 0.0 300 0.0 0.0 01 350 1000 6-9 
Hydraulic cement 
manufacture 
0.0 0.0 0.0 250 0.0 0.0 25 0.0 600 6.5-8.5 
Canned and dried fruits 
and vegetables 
0.0 0.0 0.0 250 0.0 10 0.2 250 500 6.5-8.5 
Pond 29.02 14.11 140.66 39.35 33.65 4.88 0.08 130.5 
 
325.92 6.33 Dry 
Season 
River 29.35 14.32 157.36 34.42 32.28 3.67 0.14 132.17 
 
337 6.56 
Pond 25.06 11.76 150.83 23.75 26.15 2.56 0.12 110.96 
 
285.54 6.80 
# A
ve
ra
ge
 V
al
ue
s i
n 
th
e 
st
ud
y 
ar
ea
 
(s
ur
fa
ce
 w
at
er
) 
Wet 
Season 
River 25.89 12.44 169.03 26.78 25.30 2.88 0.29 115.83 
 
315.67 
 
6.78 
Note:  # Present study. 
674 
 
    Table 5 represents that in the whole year the surface water of the Magura municipality area is 
suitable for wood chemical industries and unsuitable for textiles, soft drinks bottling and 
chemical pulp and paper industries. This water is also suitable for Synthetic rubber, Petroleum 
products, Hydraulic cement manufacture and canned and dried fruits and vegetables after primary 
treatment. 
 
3.5 Evaluation of surface water for irrigation purposes 
 
Irrigation water criteria depend on both the chemical composition and the nature of plants to be 
irrigated, soil type, climate, amount and method of irrigation and drainage. Table 6 shows the 
classification of water quality for evaluates their suitability for irrigation purpose.  
Table 6 Classification of water quality for evaluates their suitability for irrigation purpose 
Dry Season Wet Season 
6Average Values 
in the study 
area 
(surface water) 
6Average Values in 
the study area 
(surface water) parameters Units Ranges Water Class 
Pond 
water 
River 
water 
Suitability 
 
Pond 
water 
River 
water 
Suitability 
 
 
 
<250 Salinity hazard low 
250–750 Salinity hazard medium 
750–2,250 Salinity hazard high 1EC 
μS/cm 
 
 >2,250 Salinity hazard very high 
 
501.79 
 
522 
 
Both water are 
suitable for 
soil of 
moderate 
drainage 
 
406.17 
 
 
451 
 
Both water are 
suitable for soil 
of 
moderate 
drainage 
<20 Excellent 
20-40 Good 
40-60 Permissible 
60-80 Doubtful 
2SSP % 
>80 Unsuitable 
 
43.56 
 
 
44.87 
 
Both are 
permissible 
for irrigation 
 
40.18 
 
 
44.40 
Both are 
permissible for 
irrigation 
<10 Low sodium water 
10-18 medium sodium water 
18-26 high sodium water 
1SAR  
>26 Very high sodium water 
 
1.40 
 
 
1.46 
 
Both can be 
used on all 
soils 
 
1.12 
 
 
1.33 
 
Both can be 
used on all 
soils 
<2 Excellent 
2–6 Good to injurious 3Chloride meq/L 
>6 Injurious to unsuitable 
 
1.11 
 
0.97 
Both are 
excellent for 
irrigation 
 
0.67 
 
0.76 
Both are 
excellent for 
irrigation 
<4 Excellent 
4–12 Good to injurious 3Sulphate meq/L 
>12 Injurious to unsuitable 
 
0.7 
 
0.67 
Both are 
excellent for 
irrigation 
 
0.54 
 
0.53 
Both are 
excellent for 
irrigation 
< 1.5 No restriction  
1.5 – 8.5 Slight to Moderate 4Bicarbonate meq/L 
> 8.5 Severe 
 
2.31 
 
2.58 
Both are slight 
to moderate 
restricted  for 
irrigation 
 
2.47 
 
2.77 
Both are slight 
to moderate 
restricted for 
irrigation 
0 – 75 Soft 
75 – 150 Moderately hard 
150 – 300 Hard 
5Total Hardness mg /L 
>300 Very hard 
 
130.5 
 
132.17 
Both are 
moderately 
hard 
 
110.96 
 
115.83 
Both are 
moderately 
hard 
200–500 Best quality water 
1000–2000 Water involving Hazard 
2TDS mg /L 
3000-7000 
Used for irrigation only 
with leaching and perfect 
drainage 
 
325.92 
 
337 
Best quality 
water for 
irrigation 
 
285.54 
 
315.67 
Best quality 
water for 
irrigation 
 
Sources: 1USSL (1954); 2Wilcox (1955); 3Eaton (1942); 4 Ayres and Westcot (1985); 5Sawyer and Mc 
Carty (1967); 6 Present study 
675 
 
    Table 6 represent that both waters are suitable for soil of moderate drainage based on the 
values of electrical conductivity of water samples according to USSL (1954). Sodium Adsorption 
Ratio (SAR) is an important parameter in determining the suitability of irrigation water because 
high sodium makes the soil hard as well as reduces its permeability. According to U.S. Salinity 
Laboratory Staff (1954), all water in the study area can be used on all soils. The US Salinity 
Laboratory's diagram is used widely for rating the irrigation water where SAR is plotted against EC.  
 
Figure 2: SAR Conductivity plot 
 
    Figure 2 illustrates that most of the water samples fall in the field C2S1, indicating medium 
salinity and low sodium water. This water is desirable for irrigation.  Based on the classification 
after Wilcox (1955) for SSP, all the water samples in the study area fall under permissible class 
which indicates all this water could be safe for irrigation and These water contain less than 350 
mg/L  total dissolved solids and can be classified as best quality water for irrigation (Table 6). 
Wilcox diagrams were also plotted to determine the probability effects of the water on soil 
hydraulic properties if it is used for the irrigation activities in the area. On the Wilcox diagram 
prepared according to EC vs SSP values, most of the water samples of the study area fell into the 
classification "very good to good” for irrigation (Figure 3).  
    For irrigation purposes water hardness classification is done by Sawyer and McMcartly (1967). 
Based on this classification, all the water samples in the study area fall under moderately hard 
class which indicate that these water could be safe for irrigation. According to Eaton (1942) 
classification, chloride (Cl-) and sulfate (SO42- ) contents of the surface water samples in the study 
area are excellent for irrigation and The surface water of the study area can be classified as slight 
to moderate restricted  for irrigation based on the  bicarbonate (HCO3-) values of water according 
to Ayres and Westcot (1985) ( Table 6). The Comparison of the surface water quality in the study 
area with the National and International recommended Guidelines for Irrigation Water Quality 
represents in Table 7. This table reflects that the average SAR, SSP, Ht, RSBC and other values 
676 
 
(except potassium concentration) of surface water satisfy the recommended guidelines. So, all of 
the obtain values of the surface water samples in the study area are found to be within the safe 
limits for irrigation. 
 
 
Figure 3: Wilcox diagram of surface water for irrigation 
Table 7 Compare of the surface water quality in the study area with the National and 
              International  recommended Guidelines for Irrigation Water Quality 
 
Parameter 
(Units) 
T
em
 (o
C
) 
pH
 
E
C
 (m
S 
/c
m
) 
T
D
S 
(m
g 
/L
) 
H
t (
m
g 
/L
) 
SA
R
 
SS
P 
(%
) 
R
SB
C
 (m
eq
/ L
) 
N
a+
 (m
eq
/ L
) 
K
+  (
m
eq
/ L
) 
C
a2
+  (
m
eq
/ L
) 
M
g2
+  (
m
eq
/ L
) 
H
C
O
3-
 (m
eq
/ L
) 
C
l-  
(m
eq
/ L
) 
N
O
3-
 (m
eq
/ L
) 
SO
42
-  (
m
eq
 /L
) 
PO
43
-  (
m
eq
 /L
) 
DOE 
(1997)* 
20-
30 
6.5-
8.5 
- 0-
1000 
200-
500 
-   8.70 0.308 3.75 2.5-
2.95 
- 4.23-
6.90 
0.161 400 6 
BWPCB 
(1976)* 
 6.5-
9.2 
 0-
1500 
        - 16.90 0.726 400  
WHO 
(1983)# 
- 6.5-
8.5 
- 0-
1000 
500 -   8.70 - 10 4.17  7.04 0.161 400 - 
UCCC 
(1974)# 
 6.5-
8.4 
700-
3000 
450-
2000 
 0-3   2.96-
8.87 
   1.49 3.75 0.081   
Wilcox 
(1955) # 
  250-
2000 
   0-60           
Richards 
(1954) # 
  0-
3000 
  0-
18 
    0-
20 
      
So
ur
ce
s 
Ayres 
and 
Westcot 
(1985) # 
 6.0-
8.5 
 
 
0-
2000 
 0-
15 
  0-40 0-
0.051 
 0-5 0-
10 
0-30 0-
0.161 
0-
20 
0-
0.063 
677 
 
Po
nd
  25.95 6.33 0.501 325.92 130.5 
 
1.40 
 
43.56 
 
0.86 
 
1.64 0.47 1.45 1.16 2.31 1.11 0.08 0.7 0.05 
D
ry
 S
ea
so
n 
R
iv
er
  26.13 6.56 0.522 337 132.17 
 
1.46 
 
44.87 1.11 
 
1.67 0.48 1.47 1.18 2.58 0.97 0.06 0.67 0.04 
Po
nd
  31.46 6.80 0.406 285.54 110.96 
 
1.12 
 
40.18 
 
1.22 
 
1.20 0.36 1.25 0.97 2.47 0.67 0.04 0.54 0.02 
¤ A
ve
ra
ge
 V
al
ue
s i
n 
th
e 
st
ud
y 
ar
ea
 
(s
ur
fa
ce
 w
at
er
) 
W
et
 S
ea
so
n 
R
iv
er
  31.57 6.78 0.451 315.67 115.83 
 
1.33 
 
44.40 
 
1.48 
 
1.43 0.42 1.29 1.02 2.77 0.76 0.05 0.53 0.02 
 
Note: * National Guidelines; #International Guidelines; ¤ Present study. 
 
4. Conclusion 
 
From the study results and discussions it may be concluded that the surface water quality in 
Magura municipality is ranging from suitable to unsuitable for the different purposes. Result of 
this research work has shown that surface water (both ponds and river water) of Magura 
municipality is not suitable for drinking because of the high values of total suspended solids, 
potassium concentration, fecal pollution and lower values of DO than the standards or guidelines 
for drinking uses. This study also explicit that the surface water is can be used for some domestic 
uses but not all domestic purposes because of the higher fecal pollution of water.  Higher number 
of Coli form found in the surface water samples may be for human feces and municipal wastes. 
Polluted stream flows into the surface water and latrine within 10 m from the pond were the 
responsible factors for contamination of surface water by fecal coli form. The surface water in the 
area studied is suitable for agricultural purpose because SAR, SSP, RSBC, TH, TDS, EC and 
other contents (except potassium concentration) of surface water in the study area satisfy the 
national and international guideline for irrigation water quality. From This research it has been 
found that any toxic pollution and salinity problem has not found but fecal pollution is one of the 
major concerns in this area. So, results of this study reveal that after light treatment this surface 
water can be used for various purposes as alternative sources and thus will reduce the pressure on 
ground water in the Magura municipality area.   
 
References 
 
Ayres, R. S. and Westcot, D. W. (1985). Water Quality for Agriculture. FAO Irrigation and  
        Drainage Paper No. 29. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United  Nations, Rome.  
       pp: 1-117. 
Ahmed, M. F. and Rahman, M. M. (2003). Water Supply and Sanitation: Rural and Low Income   
       Urban Communities. 2nd Ed., ITN-Bangladesh, pp: 331-338. 
BWPCB (Bangladesh Water Pollution Control Board) (1976). Bangladesh Drinking Water  
       Standard. Bangladesh Water Pollution Control Board, GOB, Dhaka. 
Bhardwaj, R. M., Chilton, J. and Gun, J. V. D. (2006). Water Quality for Ecosystem and  Human  
        Health: United Nations Environment Programme Global Environment Monitoring System  
        GEMS/Water Programme. National Water Research Institute, Burlington,Ontario, L7R 4A6  
678 
 
        Canada, ISBN 92-95039-10-6, pp: 9-10, 123-125. 
DPHE (2005). Water quality monitoring and surveillance protocol for rural water supply.  
       Department for Public Health Engineering, Dhaka, Bangladesh. 
DOE (Department Of Environment) (1997). Bangladesh Gazette, No. DA-1. Department of  
       Environment, Ministry of Forest, pp: 1324-1327. 
Eaton, F. M. (1942). Toxicity and accumulation of chloride and sulfate salts in plants. Journal of  
       Agricultural Research, 64, pp: 357–399. 
ECR (1997). Environmental Conservation Rules, 1997. Ministry of Environment and Forest,  
       Government of Bangladesh. pp: 205-207. 
Gupta, S. K. and Gupta, I. C. (1987). Management of Saline Soils and Water. Oxford  and  IBH  
       Publication. Co. New Delhi, India, pp: 399. 
Greenberg, A. E., Clesceri, L. S. and Eaton, A. D. (eds) (1992). Standard Methods for the  
      Examination of Water and Wastewater. 18th edition, APHA/AWWA/WEF, Washington D. C.,    
     pp: 2.56-57, 4.87-88. 
Hem, J. D. (1989).Study and interpretation of the chemical characteristics of natural water. U. S.   
      Geological Survey, Water Supply, Papers 1473 & 2254. 
NASNAE (National Academy of Science and National Academy of Engineering) (1972). Water  
      quality criteria protection Agency, Washington, D.C., pp: 1-594. 
Pal, O. K. (1994). Exportable Fish Resources of Bangladesh. Tuli-mili press, Khulna,   
      Bangladesh, pp: 190-192. 
Ramesh, R. and Anbu, M. (1996). Chemical Methods for Environmental Analysis-Water and  
       Sediment. Macmillan India Ltd, pp: 12-67. 
Richards, L. A. (1954). Diagnosis and Improvement of Saline and Alkali Soils. Agricultural  
        Handbook 60, USDA and IBH Publishing Co. Ltd. New Delhi, India, pp: 98-99. 
Raghunath, I. I. M. (1987). Groundwater. Second edition; Wiley Eastern Ltd., New Delhi, India,  
       pp: 344-369.  
Sawyer, G. N. and McMcartly, D. L. (1967). Chemistry of sanitary engineers, 2nd ed. McGraw  
       Hill, New York, pp: 518. 
Smith, A.H., Lingas, E.O., and Rahman M., (2000 ).“Contamination of Drinking- Water by  
      Arsenic in Bangladesh: a Public Health Emergency”, Bulletin of  World Health  
     Organization, Vol. 78, No. 8, WHO, pp.1093-1103. 
Todd, D. K. (1980). Groundwater hydrology. Wiley International Edition. Wiley, New York. 
Taha, A. A., El Mahmoudi, A. S. and El-Haddad, I. M. (2003).  Evaluation of the Water Quality  
        in New Communities South East the Nile Delta, Egypt, Emirates Journal for Engineering  
        Research, 8 (2), pp: 51-67. 
U.S. Salinity Laboratory (USSL) (1954). Diagnosis and improvement of saline and alkali soils;  
        USDA Handbook No. 60, L. A. Richards, Ed. 
Wilcox, L. V. (1955). Classification and Use of Irrigation Waters. U. S. Dept Agric. Circular No.  
        969. Washington, D C. 
679 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
CHARACTERIZATION OF WASTE IN PHARMACEUTICALS COMPANY 
 
 
Abu Jubayer1 and Dr. Abul Kalam Azad2 
 
 
ABSTRACT: Pharmaceuticals is one of the leading industries which are producing life saving 
drugs in our country as well as earning large amount of foreign currency. Although about 250 
pharmaceutical companies are registered in Bangladesh. Waste of the pharmaceuticals is 
important for management. The aim of the study is to characterize the waste and their 
management system through environment friendly way. To accomplish this aim, the study has 
been conducted in APC pharmaceuticals, Lakhpur, Bagerhat which produces large amount of 
essential drugs. Based on the questionnaire survey and physio-chemical test of waste in 
laboratory this study has been performed. Total waste is classified into three types solid, liquid 
and gaseous. From major five spots solid waste are produce for formulation of drug raw materials. 
For the liquid waste Na, Ca, Cl, DO, and SO4 exceed the DoE standard opposite site color, odor, 
temperature, K and PO4 is under DoE standard. The collection, separation, treatment and disposal 
techniques are used for management of waste. In current situation the size of industry is small, 
but for further extension of the industry claimed a better ETP for treatment of waste. All the 
pharmaceuticals produce large quantity of solid wastes for their production. This study will 
provide the knowledge of solid waste character produced in a pharmaceutical company and a 
better management system suitable for all of them. The total work will also increase the 
awareness against toxic pharmaceuticals waste and its tremendous effect on our Environment. 
 
1. Introduction 
Pharmaceutical waste is those which may include expired drugs, patients’ discarded personal  
medications, waste materials, open containers of drugs that cannot be used, containers, drugs that  
are discarded, contaminated garments, absorbents and spill cleanup material, waste water etc. 
(DNR, 2008). Most of the waste from pharmaceutical industry may be contaminated waste and 
poses infectious risk to the environment and engaged persons who handle it for collection, 
treatment and disposal process (CDC, 1985; Rutala, 1993). Since 1980s pharmaceuticals have 
increasingly been recognized and reported as chemical pollutants and serious problem for the 
environment (Daughton, 2003; Daughton, 2007). The environmental and physical consequences 
of improper pharmaceutical waste management are serious in various ways have already been 
                                                        
1Abu Jubayer, B.sc. in Environmental Science Discipline, Khulna University, 
leojubayer@gmail.com 
2Dr. Abul Kalam Azad, Professor, Environmental Science Discipline, Khulna University, 
Azad2007@yahoo.com 
 
680 
 
identified. Although pharmaceutical contaminants have not been found at therapeutic levels, they 
have potential adverse consequences including water quality degradation, endocrine disruption, 
antibiotic resistance and negative public perception regarding water cleanliness (Colborn et al., 
1997). Pharmaceutical waste characterization is an important stage of the research process since 
it provides a deep knowledge of the material which is crucial to answer questions, understand 
behaviors and propose solutions of toxic waste for the next steps (Gomes et al., 2005). 
 
1.1 Objectives of the Study 
 
To identify the waste of the Pharmaceuticals, to characterize and analyze the waste of the 
pharmaceuticals; and to develop an environmentally friendly waste management system of the 
pharmaceuticals. 
 
2. Materials and Methods 
 
The study is based on both primary data and secondary data. Primary data were collected through 
questionnaire survey and oral talk with local persons and experts and secondary data were 
collected from various organizations, published and unpublished documents. 
 
2.2 Location of the study area 
The concerning industry is located at Lakhpur, Fakirhat, Bagerhat, Bangladesh. It is situated at 
the north western part of Bagerhat District.  The total area of the plot is 11061 sq. feet. The 
highway is located about 3.82 km to the site. Thus the site is well connected to the roadways for 
the movements of the products and raw materials. The industry is situated north-west corner of 
Bagerhat district. The necessary infrastructural facilities like power, labor, and 
telecommunication are available at the plant site. Other necessary facilities are also easily 
available here. 
 
2.3 Primary data collection  
A draft questionnaire was prepared for survey the high officials, workers and local people. The 
questionnaire contains the basic information like solid waste, liquid waste, gaseous waste, worker 
perception, local people perception. 
 
2.4 Secondary data collection 
The secondary data collection and information were based on the articles, books, review of 
published literature on the concerned topic and the thesis papers Khulna University. Journals, 
papers and articles relevant to the study were collected from central library and seminar library 
Khulna University as well as internet. Maps and other standards regarding to the study were 
collected from internet. Factory location, Necessary snaps, Waste statistical data and other 
necessary information were collected from the authority of APC Pharmaceuticals. 
 
 
681 
 
2.5 Parameter tested 
 
Physicals parameters are Color, Odor, Temperature, Dissolved Oxygen (DO), Solid waste quality 
Chemical parameters are Sodium (Na), Potassium (K+2), Chloride (Cl-), Salphet (SO4), Phosphate 
(PO4), Dissolved  Oxygen (DO). Color is observed visually, Odor is measured directly smelling,  
   All the relevant data were processed and analyzed with the help of conventional statistical 
techniques, manually and for the computer based analysis MS Excel of Office 2007 version was 
used.  
 
 
3. Results and Discussion 
 
This identification of waste is done by analyzing through some parameters like Color, Odor, 
Temperature, Gaseous quality, Physical characteristics, Na, k, Ca, Cl, SO4, PO3, Dissolved 
Oxygen (DO). In this study the physicochemical parameters of pharmaceuticals industry waste is 
calculated with many aspects. This study will also help you that, to gain the knowledge about the 
criteria of waste of the industry, the types of waste, the worker condition, their facilities, the 
management procedure, local people perception. Which wastes are produce Solid waste (Packets, 
Gloves, Broken glasses, Clothes, Cartons, and Sacks), Liquid waste (Waste water, Raw materials 
waste), Gaseous waste (Powder fly in full swing production. Air pollution for incineration of 
waste dioxins, acid gases, carbon monoxide, and carbon dioxide) 
 
3.1Color 
The color of the sludge varies from one source to another source, one factory to another factory. 
It results for the addition of different additives for the better treatment of the effluent. Due to the 
addition of additives color of the sludge varies. The color also depends on the raw materials of 
the of the pharmaceuticals company. The color of the pharmaceuticals company waste was slight 
radish in initial point and totally radish in main dumping area. The color of the waste has no 
harmful impact on the environment. 
 
3.2 Odor 
Odor generally produces for the presence of organic matter and some of inorganic matter. In 
terms of pharmaceuticals waste many types of medicinal waste are dumped into the place, some 
odor is produced in the dumping are. The sample collection point produces some odor because 
they are washout waste water. All the evaluation of odor is depended on sense of smell. All over 
the study we found some odor in the dumping area. 
 
3.3 Temperature 
The temperature is so important for sample which is collected and the physiochemical 
measurements are made more important for data correlation and interpretation process. 
Temperature readings are essential while performing tests such as color DO, as well as 
calculating parameters. According to the standard of DoE temperature of the waste should be 
40ºC (DoE- 2003). In this study the temperature of liquid waste was measured and it was among 
32.20C – 34.40C which was in the acceptable limit and shown in the Figure 3.1. So the 
temperature of the waste has no harmful effect for the disposal in the environment. 
 
682 
 
3.4 Dissolved Oxygen (DO) 
Through the direct field survey the amount of Dissolved Oxygen (DO) was collected. DO is 
parameter which indicate the condition of water. Only the wash room water was founded in the 
range of DoE standard. The DoE standard for waste water in industry is 4.5 – 8.0 mg/l. All of the 
samples DO range in under the standard except first sample. Because the first sample water is 
collected from wash room and there is no cause for decreasing the DO. They just use the fresh 
water for washing the room. But other samples required oxygen to decompose the matters present 
in the water. So their DO level is too low and under the DoE standard. It is showing through the 
table 3.2 with regarding of DoE standard. So the water must treat for dumping into another water 
body or in environment.  
 
3.5 Sodium 
Sodium is an important factor for waste in the pharmaceuticals industry. Sample which were 
collected there the amount of Na is high because they use the sodium (Na) for Tablet 
Disintegration. In the first sample the water was coming from that room. So, The amount of 
Sodium (Na) was high in the first sample. For the other samples the amount of sodium (Na) is 
low rather than the first room. In the tablet room the Flucloxacillin Sodium is claimed as a raw 
material (yearly used 120kg). So the amount of sodium is high in the waste sample. According to 
the Department of Environment (DoE) in the industrial waste water amount of Na is 200 mg/l 
(DoE -2003). The maximum value is 692.8571 mg/l and minimum value is 121.4263 mg/l.  
 
3.6 Calcium (Ca+2) 
The dumping area huge amount of Ca is present. The maximum value is 170.33 mg/l and the 
minimum value is 68.133 mg/l and the average value is 105.806 mg/l. According to the DoE 
standard Calcium amount is 75.0 mg/l (DoE, 2003). The pharmaceuticals industry use Calcium 
Carbonate (CaCo3) for preparing the medicines. In the dumping area amount of Calcium is high 
because all of the dumped waste is accumulate in the dumping site and create huge amount.  
 
3.7 Potassium (k+) 
Very trace amount of Potassium (K) is present in the samples. Because there is trace use of 
Potassium related raw materials in the APC pharmaceuticals industry. Maximum value of 
Potassium is .78mg/l, minimum value is .59 mg/l. According to the DoE standard the amount of 
Potassium (K) is 12.0 mg/l in the waste water.  
 
3.8 Chloride (Cl-) 
In the pharmaceuticals industry huge amount of HCl is used for manufacturing. Such as, 
Ramitudume, HCl and Cetrizime, 2Hcl is used as major raw materials in manufacturing. 
According to the Department of Environment (DoE) the standard of Chloride (Cl) in industrial 
waste water is 600mg/l (DoE-2003). The maximum value is 886mg/l and minimum value is 
567.2mg/l and the average value is 673.39mg/l. Average amount of Cl and in the dumping area 
the amount is high. All the point water is accumulated here so the amount of Cl is high in this 
place. So there need a treatment plant for managing the dumped water. 
 
3.9 Phosphate (PO4-3) 
Pharmaceuticals industry has trace amount uses of Phosphate. As a result the amount of 
Phosphate in all of the samples is so much trace. All of the samples are under the standard of 
683 
 
WHO standard.  
 
3.10 Sulphate (SO4-2) 
The APC pharmaceuticals use the Sulphate pillets and omiprazol pillets which contain Salphet. 
The maximum value is 633.33mg/l and the minimum value is 10.16mg/l. According to DoE 
standard the value of Salphet is 112.2 mg/l. In the dumping area has the heist amount of Salphet. 
Because of when they use the pillets then release the water which mixed in the dumping area.  
 
3.11 Collection method 
Among some of collection method the permeable is Container collection system. According to 
this system some container will be located in some special places for collecting the waste. Like 
papers, bottles, broken glasses etc. Implementing this procedure containers location is important. 
Near the syrup packaging room, capsule room, office room, laboratory, quality control room and 
every room get a container for claiming all the solid waste produce from those places. 
   Liquid waste collection is producing trace or large amount from each room which is 
discharging through a drain. Collect all of them through a big channel. Like blister room water, 
capsule room water, tablet room water, laboratory room water, packaging room water is 
discharging separate channel. All of water will accumulate into a large drain.  
   Gaseous waste collection the vacuum cleaner is the best option for gaseous waste collection. 
Workers use the mask for protecting the inhaling of powder. So, it is safe for the environment. 
   Separation technique Separate part by part through some system. Such as, broken glass 
collects from packaging room Carton collect from raw materials side and main packaging site 
Bottle and papers collect from every place. Sale them in the local market through agents. 
 
3.12 Treatment 
Solid waste - Repair & Reuse: The collection of used items, such as glasses, paper, carton torn 
cloths sell them local market for reuse and repurpose them. Reduction of waste sources is the 
most preferred method because it can reduce system costs and resource consumption. Source 
Reduction stops waste at the source because it avoids that item’s entry into the waste stream. 
   Recycle & new product feedstock: This method is the collection of materials that might 
become waste, such as glass, aluminum, steel, plastic, paper, etc. and the sorting and processing 
of these to manufacture as new products. When recycled, these materials create new product 
feedstock instead of using virgin resources. The new products may or may not be similar to the 
original product. This method prevents items being put into landfills and conserves natural 
resources. 
   Manufacturer take-back: A program in which manufacturers take back older items, Such as 
some medicine get date expired for long time staying in market. Allocate them in a specific site 
regard for disposal immediately. Liquid waste treatment use huge amount of water for washing 
the plant. Then after collecting those through channel release the density of waste water by using 
the fresh water and throughout them into the dumping area. According the present condition this 
process is tolerable but in the near future the industry want the more plant and more production in 
that point of view they need the Effluent Treatment Plant (ETP) for treatment of all the liquid 
waste. 
 
 
 
 
684 
 
3.13 Disposal method 
 
Incineration: The process of burning solid waste under controlled conditions.  
Landfill: The disposal of back medicine and solid waste by burying in the ground between layers 
of earth and deep ground water. 
 
4. Conclusion 
 
APC Pharmaceuticals Ltd. is one of the pioneering pharmaceuticals industries which is playing 
very important role in formulating live saving drugs as well as able to earn large amount of 
foreign currency. At present, APC Pharmaceutical Ltd would provide essential drugs and 
medicines for fulfilling the minimum health care facility in the country. Some kinds of waste are 
producing form production process. Some solid waste, liquid waste, and some gaseous waste are 
founded. The physical and chemical characteristics show that Na, Ca, Cl, and SO4 is exceed the 
DoE standard on the other side k and PO4 is present under the DoE standard. Solid wastes are 
collect through collection technique from the room and other side, Separate them and recycle or 
for reuse sell to the local scraper. Liquid waste is more dangerous, for their collection the channel 
system is used and should use more water for decreasing their concentration. Some toxic dress 
and gloves from workers are founded. All of them firstly incinerate than buried into the earth by 
looking at eye into the earth and groundwater level. From the present investigation it is assure 
that they had no more toxic waste for polluting the environment directly. But in the future they 
want to extant their production in that case they need the Effluent Treatment Plant (ETP) for 
decreasing the waste.  
5.  Special Problems 
 
5.1 Tables 
There some tables are present which help u to compromise the data with respect of DoE 
standards, amount of wastes and there terrific condition upon the environment. Small industry 
shows the large amount annually, and then this is the question how much amount is discharging 
from all of the big pharmaceuticals industry in our small country and its environment. It’s a big 
concern for us. 
Table 2: Waste amount in the industry 
 
Place Types Quality Monthly Amount Yearly Amount 
Industries Solid Non toxic 12-15 kgs 140-150 kgs 
Office Solid Non toxic 4 -5 kgs 50-55 kgs  
Workers solid Toxic 100-120 pairs  1200-1250 pairs 
Source: APC official data 
Table 3: Waste water from manufacturing room 
 
Waste water  Liter/day Liter/Year 
Manufacturing Room 100 - 120 27000 – 32400 
 
 
685 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
I appreciate Md. Masudur Rahman, Hena Voumik, Ahsanullah, Sumon Devnath and all of my 
teachers and classmates in my discipline for helping me to complete my thesis work.  
 
 
References 
 
Alaadin A, Bukhari D, 2002, Pharmaceutical Waste Treatment and Disposal Practices, Centre for    
Environment and Water, Research Institute, KFUPM. 
Alaadin A, et al, 2002,  Akter N, 2000,  Goutam A 1992, Gomes et al 2005, Islama S et al 
2010,  Rutala WA 1993,  
Akter N,  2000 Medical Waste Management: A Review, Environmental Engineering Program 
School of Environment, Resources and Development January, 2000 Asian Institute of Technology, 
GPO Box 4, Khlongluang, Pathumthani 12120, Thailand 
Environmental Conservation Act (Act 73 of 1989); Water Act (Act 54 of 1956) (refer to Section 
paragraph 1.1); Atmospheric Pollution Act (Act 45 of 1965); Health Act (Act 63 of 1977); 
environmental Conservation Act (Act 73 of 1989); 
Georgia Statewide, 2005 Waste Characterization Study, Georgia Department of Community 
Affairs, Georgia. 
Goutam A., Joshi V. P. and Semwal O. P., 1992 Industrial effluent and aquatic pollution in 
Aquatic Environment. (Ashish Publishing House, New Delhi) pp 48-57. 
Gomes, A.F.S., Vinhal, A.P. and Ladeira, A.C.Q., 2005. Estimation of Potential Pollution of 
Uranium Sludge from Acid Water Treatment. Center for Development of Nuclear Technology- 
CDTN. Campus da UFMG Belo-Horizonte /MG – Brazil. p. 3.  
Islama S, Alama R and Islam S, 2010 Analysis of Metal in Wastewater Collected from Three 
Pharmaceutical Industries Located in Tongi Area of Gazipur District. Department of 
Environmental sciences, Jahangirnagar University, Savar, Dhaka - 1342 and Analytical Research 
Division, BCSIR Laboratories, Dhaka, Bangladesh. 
Parvez M, 2010 An overview of the pharmaceutical sector in Bangladesh, BRAC EPL Research, 
68 Motijheel C/A, Dhaka-1000 
Rutala WA. 1993. Disinfection, sterilization and waste disposal, in Prevention and Control of 
Nosocomial Infections, 2nd ed. Wenzel RD (ed). Williams & Wilkins: Baltimore, MD. 
US EPA (Environmental Protection Agency), 1988 Waste Minimization Opportunity Assessment                        
Manual, Government Institutes Inc., Rockville, Md 
686 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh  
 
 
 
A STUDY ON THE STUDENTS’ PERCEPTION OF PEDESTRIAN RISK 
 
 
Abdullah Al Hashib1, Md. Sabbir Zaman2, Montasir Islam Arin3, Dr. Shakil Mohammad Rifaat4 
and Md. Al-Amin5 
 
 
ABSTRACT: Pedestrian injuries have become a major safety problem all over the world, 
especially in Asia, including Bangladesh. In Bangladesh, with a low level of motorization, the 
role of walk mode is quite significant. However, pedestrians have received far less attention while 
comparing with vehicular traffic. Up to 61 percent of urban road accident deaths are pedestrians 
alone. Pedestrians accounted for 49 percent of all reported fatalities in Bangladesh. Above 
statistics clearly show that pedestrians are one of the most vulnerable groups from road accident 
perspective. For developing proper countermeasure to reduce the number of pedestrian involved 
crashes, adequate studies are required to understand why these crashes occur. It is understandable 
that risk taking behavior is one reason of pedestrian crashes and risk perception is associated with 
risk taking behavior in traffic hazards. The aim of this study was to explore student’s perception 
of pedestrian risk and the factors associated with it. A questionnaire survey was conducted among 
the University students, and a total of 150 samples were collected. Multiple regression analysis 
was applied to analyze the data. The study revealed the factors influencing the perceived risk of 
pedestrians.  
 
Keywords: Traffic safety, Pedestrian Crash, Pedestrian facilities, Risk perception, Multiple 
Regression, University Students, Bangladesh 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Road traffic accidents have now become a major safety problem all over the world and the 
situation is deteriorating especially in the developing country like Bangladesh. Bangladesh is a 
South Asian country that ranks one of the poorest in the world in terms of per capita income, 
GDP per capita is US$600 (Begum R.A., 2009). It has a land size of 147,570 square Km and is 
                                                        
14th year Undergraduate Student, Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Islamic University 
of Technology, Gazipur, Bangladesh. 
24th year Undergraduate Student, Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Islamic University 
of Technology, Gazipur, Bangladesh. 
34th year Undergraduate Student, Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Islamic University 
of Technology, Gazipur, Bangladesh. 
4 Assistant Professor, Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Islamic University of 
Technology, Gazipur, Bangladesh. 
5Lecturer, Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Islamic University of Technology, Gazipur, 
Bangladesh. 
687 
 
one of the most densely populated countries in the world with a population density of about 850 
inhabitants per square km (Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics). Another alarming statistics is that 
population growth is 1.42 per annum. About 27% of the population is living in the urban areas 
and the rate of urbanization over the last decade has been between 7 to 8% (Begum R.A., 2009). 
In Dhaka population density is about 8200 per sq km (Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics).  
 
However, the annual economic wastage occasioned by traffic accidents is estimated to be in the 
order of Taka 1050 core in Bangladesh (Ahsan et al., 2002). The study “Global Burden of 
Disease” undertaken by the World Health Organization (WHO), Harvard University and World 
Bank, showed that traffic accidents were the world’s ninth biggest cause of deaths during 1990. 
The study forecasts that by the year 2020, road accidents would move up to third place in the 
table of major causes of death and disability (Hossain et al., 2005). This problem draws 
significant attention in Bangladesh where road accidents are extremely high and still increasing. 
   
In Bangladesh fatality rates per 10,000 vehicles are about 86 persons (Ross, 1998), which is 33% 
higher than India and over three times greater than Thailand. The traffic accident situation in 
Bangladesh is really alarming and the loss of lives and property damages are expected to continue 
if suitable corrective measures are not taken accordingly by applying proper engineering 
measures through extensive research and investigations. This situation is very alarming 
particularly in metropolitan cities because 20 percent of road accident in the country occurred in 
metropolitan cities viz. Dhaka, Chittagong, Khulna and Rajshahi (Hoque, 1991). 
   
In another investigation, Bangladesh Police HQ conducted some road accident survey from 1993 
to 2000 in Bangladesh. They reported 45616 casualties during these 8 years. They showed that 
pedestrians are involved in about 70% of road accidents (Hoque, 2004). All those statistics 
clearly shows that road crashes is a major problem in Bangladesh. 
 
Among the different types of crashes, pedestrian fatalities show a significant portion of total 
fatalities in the country. Bangladesh Road Transport Authority (BRTA) showed that from 1999 to 
2008, a total of 35105 motor vehicle casualties happened in Bangladesh. In this 10 years, 13516 
pedestrians (average=211 in 64 districts) were killed in traffic crashes in Bangladesh, 
representing 53% of all the people died in traffic crashes. Among 13526 pedestrian fatalities, 
3156 (average=789) i.e. 24% happened in 4 metropolitan cities. In a particular year, for example 
in 2008 in Dhaka city, 281 pedestrians died from injuries suffered in collisions with motor 
vehicles  which accounts for 72% of all road users’ fatalities there. Also in 2008, 20% pedestrian 
fatalities of the country occurred only in Dhaka city (BRTA Report, 2008). Another statistics 
showed that 80% pedestrian fatalities of the 4 major cities occurred only in Dhaka City. 
 
The above numbers are not surprising as the most common mode of transportation is walking in 
Bangladesh as well as in Dhaka which yields a huge number of pedestrians. A significant portion 
of these pedestrians are uneducated and thus unaware about traffic rules and regulations which 
cause fatalities often.  Also Comparing with the large population, the land area is limited. As a 
result roads are very narrow and unplanned here and limited pedestrian facilities are observed 
such as presence of inadequate pedestrian crossing, pedestrian refuge island etc. 
 
However, BRTA report (2008)  showed that in Dhaka Metropolitan city, about 12% of the cases, 
adults are most likely to be seriously injured or killed in pedestrian accidents, especially 
688 
 
pedestrians aged between 21-25 has a high likelihood to involve in pedestrian collisions. The 
reasons may be that there are a lot of university students and young people in Dhaka and also this 
youth are more aggressive and careless by nature than other pedestrians. Moreover, the 
adolescents may perceive their risk of crash involvement as lower than that of others. Young 
people compared with adults, may also view some preventive measures as less effective in 
reducing the risk of a crash or injury people (Johan et al., 1987). These perceptions, combined 
with their aggressive nature and inexperience, may contribute to risk taking behavior among 
young people (Johan et al., 1987). All of these evidences indicate a clear influence of younger 
pedestrian behaviors and perception which may involve them in pedestrian collisions.  
 
Understanding that youth are one of the most risk prone groups as vulnerable road users, this 
paper attempts to find out the key issues concerning safety problems related to the young 
pedestrian group of Dhaka city. As university students are the prominent group to represent the 
youth group, this paper concentrates on undergraduate students' and try to find out their 
perception on pedestrian risk. Moreover, the reasons of choosing undergraduate students in this 
case study are that they are aged between 19 and 25, educated youth members of society who will 
lead the nation in future. 
       
The study explores on the current students’ perception on pedestrian risk in Dhaka which might 
be helpful to develop a safe pedestrian environment for this metropolitan city. In addition, the use 
of the risk perception assessment can raise awareness and generate interest among policy makers 
and city officials and help them to improve pedestrian facilities in Dhaka city. 
 
 
2. Survey Methodology 
 
A survey was conducted among undergraduate students of 10 different universities of Bangladesh 
namely Islamic University of Technology, North South University, Bangladesh Medical College, 
Bangladesh Dental College, University of Asia Pacific, United International University, 
University of Liberal Arts Bangladesh, State University of Bangladesh, Northern University 
Bangladesh and Stamford University. One hundred and fifty random samples were selected from 
there based on approximate uniform distribution between sex, study area and academic year of 
students. The methodology used in this study is based on the questionnaire survey on the 
university students to gather their sentiments regarding walking environments. For this purpose, a 
short questionnaire on roadway facilities and risk perception of the respondents was prepared 
which is attached in Appendix A. The questionnaire used in the survey was modified from the 
questionnaire used in the MSc dissertation titled “Students’ Perception of Pedestrian Risk: A 
Study on University of Calgary Students” (Hossain et al., 2010) and in the research project 
named “Walkability and Pedestrian Facilities in Asian Cities: State and Issues” commissioned by 
the Asian Development Bank (Fabian et al., 2010). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
689 
 
Table1: Pedestrian Risk Perception Survey Parameters 
 
Parameters Description 
Walking Path Modal Conflict (Question no-
4,5&6) 
 
The extent of conflict between pedestrians and 
other modes, such as rickshaws, motorcycles, 
cars etc on the road. 
Availability of Walking Paths and Obstructions 
(Question no-7,12&13) 
This parameter is added because it reflects the 
need for, availability and condition of walking 
paths as well as the presence of permanent and 
temporary obstructions on the pedestrian 
pathways which ultimately affect the effective 
width of the pedestrian pathway and may cause 
inconvenience to the pedestrians. 
Availability of Crossings (Question no-1,2&3) 
 
The availability and distances between 
crossings to describe whether pedestrians tend 
to jaywalk when there are no crossings or 
when the distances between crossings are too 
long. 
Grade Crossing Safety (Question no-8,9&10) This refers to the exposure of pedestrians to 
other modes while crossing. 
Motorist Behavior(Question no-11) The behavior of motorists toward pedestrians, 
which may well indicate the kind of pedestrian 
environment in that area. 
Amenities(Question no-14) The availability of pedestrian amenities such 
as street lights and trees. These amenities 
greatly enhance the attractiveness and 
convenience of the pedestrian environment, 
and in turn, the city itself. 
 
Table 2: Interviewed risk perception questions on pedestrian safety 
 
1. While walking, how often do you feel that crossing street is dangerous? 
2. While walking, how often do you feel that crossing street is not safe because of fast-moving 
automobiles on the street? 
3. While crossing street near an intersection without traffic control devices or on midblock 
without crossing facilities, how often do you feel it’s unsafe to cross? 
4. While walking on a side-walk just alongside a street (without buffer zone), how often do you 
feel that a fast moving car could lose control and swerve into you? 
5. How often do you feel that it’s still dangerous walking on the sidewalk with buffer zone (such 
as trees, roadside parking etc.) because of cars entering driveways? 
6. While walking through a way without any walking facilities (e.g. parking lot, alongside street 
without sidewalk), how often do you feel it’s safe to do so? 
7. How often do you feel that hawkers occupy the road and let you enter the remaining narrow 
road with danger of collision with moving vehicle? 
8. How often do you feel that there need to be installed a zebra crossing or underpass or overpass 
along your crossing zone? 
690 
 
9. While crossing street along ‘zebra crossing’, how often do you feel it is unsafe? 
10. While crossing street showing your own hand signal, how often do you feel that vehicles 
would not stop? 
11. While walking on footpath how often do you feel entering of the motor-cycle in the footpath 
can drive over you? 
12. How often do you feel that the footpath is narrow to use comfortably? 
13. While walking along the road how often do you feel the tension of danger/accident due to 
presence of unprotected manhole? 
14. How often do you feel that street lighting is not sufficient during crossing the roads or 
walking along the sideways? 
 
The questionnaire included questions on pedestrian risk perception, travel characteristics, and 
some socio-demographics. In order to minimize interview bias, the survey was conducted by the 
authors themselves. As all surveys were carried out and filled by the same three field surveyors, 
there should be fewer chances of mistakes and also less difficulty in understanding the 
questionnaire and thus the responses of the respondents. Perception of pedestrian risk was 
assessed by a Likert scale using four choices with response categories ranging from “Almost 
always” to “Rarely” to measure risk perception score. This score was considered as dependent 
variable. Since Likert scale is associated with the problem of discreteness, and the dependent 
variable in continuous data works much better in a regression model, this research used multiple 
questions where fourteen questions are related to risk perception. Each of the questionnaire 
survey was translated into a rating system so as the final risk perception score for each of the 
questionnaire was somewhere between 14(lowest score) to 56(highest score). This provided more 
variations and made the average scores close to continuous data, thus helped to get better 
regression model. Table 2 shows the questions asked to the respondents, and used to assess risk 
perception score. Respondents were asked to rate the risk perception by “Almost always”, 
“Usually”, “Occasionally” and “Rarely” for each of the question (1 being the lowest risk and 4 
the highest risk). Score was assigned based on the direction of risk perception of the questions. 
For example, if a student preferred “Almost Always” for question 2 and 6, a score 4 and 1 were 
assigned respectively. Because by marking “Almost always” to the first question, the respondent 
considered the pedestrian environment most unsafe while marking “Almost always” to the 
response of later question means perceiving the situation as most safe. Thus, a higher score 
indicates the walking and crossing environment more risky by the pedestrians.  
 
Pedestrian interview survey was mostly conducted from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. to capture the peak-hour 
pedestrian movement. As students are from different areas of Dhaka city, pedestrian survey 
represents students of residential, educational, commercial areas and around public transport 
terminals. 
 
 
3. Survey Data Description 
 
A total of 150 samples were collected. The demographics, educational, travel and other 
characteristics of the samples are shown below in table 3. 
 
 
691 
 
Table 3: Summary Statistics of Variables 
 
Variables Description Mean Std Dev 
1. Gender 1= male; female=0 0.546 0.499 
2.Age 
  Below 18 1= age below 18; otherwise=0 0.020   0.140 
  19- 20 1= age 19- 20; otherwise=0 0.366   0.483 
  21-22 1= age 21-22; otherwise=0 0.513 0.501 
  23+ 1= age 23+; otherwise=0 0.100 0.301 
3.Income 
 Less than BDT.15000 1= BDT.<15000; otherwise=0 0.086 0.282 
 BDT.15001 to BDT.25000      1= BDT 15001- 25000; 
otherwise=0 
0.146 0.354 
BDT.25001 to BDT.35000   1= BDT. 25001 to BDT. 35000; 
otherwise=0 
0.220 0.415   
BDT.35001 to 50000 1= BDT. 35001 to 50000; 
otherwise=0 
0.253   0.436   
More than BDT.50000 1= BDT.>50000; otherwise=0 0.293 0.456 
4. Number of family 
members 
Number of family members=1,2, 
3…….etc. 
4.933 2.074   
5. Driving License 1= having driving license; 
otherwise=0 
0.166 0.373   
6. Numbers of vehicles in 
family 
Number of vehicles in family=1,2, 
3…….etc. 
0.64 0.936 
7.Student Type 
   First Year Undergrad 1= 1st year student; otherwise=0 0.353 0.479   
   Second Year Undergrad       1= 2nd year student; otherwise=0 0.206   0.406   
   Third Year Undergrad 1=3rd year student; otherwise=0 0.133 0.341 
   Fourth Year Undergrad 1=4th year student; otherwise=0 0.306 0.462   
8. Area of Study 
   Engineering/Science 1=engineering/science; 
otherwise=o 
0.240   0.428 
   Medical 1=medical; otherwise=0 0.220 0.415   
   Commerce 1=commerce; otherwise=0 0.326 0.470   
   Arts 1=arts; otherwise=0 0.153 0.361 
  Others 1=others; otherwise=0 0.053 0.225 
9. Mode of Travel    
    Car 1= car; otherwise=0 0.220   0.415 
    Transit 1=transit; otherwise=0 0.340 0.475 
    CNG scooter 1= CNG scooter; otherwise=0 0.080 0.272  
    Walking 1=walking; otherwise=0 0.026 0.161 
    Rickshaw 1=rickshaw; otherwise=0 0.280   0.450 
    Motorcycle 1=motorcycle; otherwise=0 0.053 0.225 
10. Average Walk  
Less than 1.5 hours 1=<1.5 hrs; otherwise=0 0.273 0.447  
692 
 
1.5 to 3 hours 1= 1.5 to 3 hrs; otherwise=0 0.246 0.432 
3 to 4.5 hours  1= 3 to 4.5 hrs; otherwise=0 0.186 0.390 
4.5 to 6 hours  1= 4.5 to 6 hrs; otherwise=0 0.113 0.318 
6 to 7.5 hours  1= 6 to 7.5 hrs; otherwise=0 0.073 0.261 
More than 7.5 hours 1=>7.5 hrs; otherwise=0 0.106 0.309 
11. Accident Involvement 1=accident involvement; 
otherwise=0 
0.413   0.494 
12. Accident Witness 1= accident witness; otherwise=0 0.626   0.485   
 
Most of the variables used in the model are dummy variables which simply show presence or 
absence of the variable in the data set for model development. Only two variables are continuous 
in nature. Mean value shows the percentage of the independent variable presence in the total 
sample. For example, the mean of the age group 19-20 is 0.366 which means this particular age 
group presents in 36.6% sample. Some of the features of the data set are described below. 
 
Males are slightly higher in number (54.6%) than females.  The majority (51.3%) of the 
respondents ranged from 21 to 22 years in age, and a considerable percentage, 36.6% students 
were aged between 19 to 20 years. The mean household size of the students was 4.933 with 
SD=2.074 which indicate the dispersion of family members are between 2.86 to 7.01. Average 
numbers of vehicles occupied by the family of the students was 0.64. Household income of 
majority (76.6%) was more than BDT 25000. A considerable number of students (32.6%) 
represented the faculty of commerce. Highest number of the students (35.3%) surveyed were 
studying 1st year undergraduate and a notable portion (30.6%) was studying in 4th year 
undergraduate. Maximum number of the students (83.4%) did not have driving license. 
 
Travel characteristics of the participants show that 34% of the students used public transit as their 
usual mode of travel. A major portion (51.9%) of the students walked less than 3 hours a week. 
While walking, 58.7% of the students had not involved in accident previously but majority 
(62.6%) witnessed least a pedestrian accident. 
 
 
4. Model Development, Results and Discussion 
 
As previously mentioned, multiple regression analysis was employed to analyze the data.  The 
factors or independent variables were tried to be correlated with student’s risk perception 
(dependent variable of the study) in multiple linear regression analysis. The stepwise regression 
procedure was employed in the analysis to get the statistically significant variables in the final 
model. Table-4 shows the coefficient, standard error and p-value of the multiple linear regression 
analysis against each of the statistically significant variables. 
Multiple linear regression analysis was conducted by regressing the risk perception score on the 
possible explanatory variables by computer based software named “STATA” to determine 
coefficient, standard error and p-value for the variables. In this study 90% confidence interval has 
been taken to determine the statistically significant variables. 
Thus those variables whose p- values are less than 0.1 considered statistical significant variables. 
Due to low correlation between risk perception score and some variables, they were excluded 
from the regression model. 
693 
 
 
 
Table 4: Result of Multiple Linear Regression Analysis on student’s perception of pedestrian risk 
 
Variables Coefficient (B) Std Err (S.E) Significance (p-value) 
Gender -1.915  0.778 0.015   
BDT.25001 to 
BDT.35000   
2.112 0.978 0.032 
More than BDT.50000 -1.504 0.905 0.099 
Number of family 
members 
-0.427 0.186 0.023 
First Year Undergrad 1.700 0.810 0.038     
No. of cars in the 
family 
1.681  0.941 0.076   
Constant 42.567 1.197   0.000 
No. of Observations= 150 
R2= 0.2292 
Adjusted R2= 0.1968 
F- Statistics= 7.09 
P-value<0.0001 
 
As shown in the Table-4, five variables were identified as statistically significant (p<0.1) among 
the variables tried for the model development. Some variables such as age, driving license, area 
of study, mode of travel, average walk and accident involvement or witness have become 
insignificant (p>0.1) after adjusting for other categories of variables and were dropped from the 
final model shown in Table 4. 
 
Standard error of each variable shows the measurement of error of each variable in the regression 
analysis. R² value shows the overall goodness-of-fit of the model. This value suggests that 
22.92% of the variance of the student’s risk perception could be explained by the variables 
entered in the final model. The adjusted R² value is also reported. Another goodness-of-fit i.e., the 
value of F-Statistics is shown in Table 4 which also implies that the final model has sufficient 
explanatory power.  
 
As shown in Table 4, negative sign of coefficient for gender indicate that women perceived 
higher risk than male as male pedestrians were marked as 1 and women pedestrians as 0 while 
developing the data set for the model. This result explains that women are perhaps more safety 
conscious than men. Also, likewise men they might not much familiar with the pedestrian 
environment they walk on which may make them more alert on roads. 
 
It is observed from the model result that students belong to the family having earning more than 
BDT 50000 perceived less risk than the other group. Perhaps this affluent student group use car 
as their daily travel mode and expose less as a pedestrian. On the other hand, students having 
family income between BDT.25001 and BDT.35000 had significantly higher risk perceptions. 
The reason why students belong to income group BDT 25001 to BDT 35000 perceived higher 
risk may be explained by the fact that they may have more experience as pedestrians in their day 
694 
 
to day life. Also they are the prime users of public transits which are more associated with 
walking. 
 
A negative correlation was found between risk perception and number of family members. 
Perhaps in a larger family, parents get less time to make aware about road safety to their children. 
Moreover, in a bigger family, it is not possible to disseminate road safety education to individuals 
adequately. 
It is observed from the model result that the 1st year undergrad students perceived more risk 
comparing to the other undergrad students. Novice students might be more concerned about their 
safety because they are new to the road environment as pedestrians. Hence, they are more 
concerned about their safety because of inexperience as road users. On the other hand, senior 
students may feel more confident of using road as pedestrians because of familiarity with the 
surround environment which might make them less sensitive about safety. 
 
The model result in Table-4 shows that when the number of vehicle in a family goes up, 
pedestrian risk perception score goes up. The vehicle user often finds pedestrian jaywalking on 
roads in Bangladesh which might make them more alert while driving or sitting in cars as 
passengers. 
 
 
5. Conclusion and Recommendations 
 
This study attempted to examine the factors which influence the university students’ perception 
of pedestrian risk. The results obtained from the study identified five significant factors that 
associated with student’s perception on pedestrian risk. The factors are gender, family income, 
number of family members, number of cars in each household, and study year of the students. 
This study was limited to the university students’ perception. In future more studies can be 
accomplished on different pedestrian facilities, behaviors or attitude towards those facilities and 
effective solution of this safety issue. As from the questionnaire footpaths, zebra crossings, street 
lights are some factors of raising risk perception. Thus, sufficiency of these facilities would 
lessen the risk perception score of the students. It is to be remembered that provision of footpaths 
or zebra crossing cost only a minor part of investment but still providing similar mobility. So 
continuity of sidewalk should be maintained if possible. Floating shops, mobile hawkers, artisans 
and temporary traders should be removed from roads and roadsides by the respective authorities 
who will eventually decrease the risk perception score. Some studies can be accomplished to 
evaluate pre and post pedestrian facilities established for safety of pedestrians. Future research 
can also include more factors which influence risk perception and all kinds of pedestrians (i.e. 
students and non-students) of the society. 
    
BRTA report shows no sign of decreasing pedestrian accidents or casualties in our country 
throughout the years (1999-2008) which let us know about the current condition of the pedestrian 
facilities in Dhaka city as well as whole Bangladesh and thus let us think about the necessity of 
establishing more facilities to create a safe environment for the road users. Bangladesh 
government should take both short-term and long-term initiatives prioritizing safe pedestrian 
access and movement to decrease the pedestrian casualties in near future. Hopefully findings of 
this study will help traffic engineers, planners and respective authorities such as national 
government, city corporation, LGED (Local Government Engineering Department) etc to 
695 
 
understand pedestrian perception at/towards various pedestrian crosswalks and sidewalks of 
different socio-economic categories of people, and thus help to implement appropriate pedestrian 
facilities to promote a suitable road environment for pedestrians.  
     
 
References 
 
Ahsan M. H., Hoque M. M. (2002). Journal of civil Engineering, Vol. CE 30, No.1. 
Begum R.A. (2009). Road safety in Bangladesh. Deputy secretary, Ministry of communication, 
Bangladesh. 
Fabian, H., Gota, S., Mejia, A. and James Leather (2010). Walkability and Pedestrian Facilities in 
Asian Cities: State and Issues. Asian Development Bank. 
Hoque, M.E., Sarker, M.T.K., Hoque, M.S.M.M., Siddique, A.B.M.A (2009). RTA Annual Report 
2008, Bangladesh Road Transport Authority. 
Hoque M.M. (1991). Accident investigation for the safety improvement of Dhaka-Aricha 
highway: A section of Asian highway. Final Report, Department of Civil Engineering, 
Bangladesh University of Engineering & Technology, Dhaka, Bangladesh. 
Hoque, M.M. (2004). The Road to Road Safety: Issues and Initiatives in Bangladesh. Regional 
Health Forum – Volume 8, Number 1. 
Hossain, M.S., Hunt, J.D., Tay, R. (2010). Students’ Perception of Pedestrian Risk. 
Transportation and logistics Trends and Policies: Successes and Failures. Proceedings of the 
45th Annual Conference of Canadian Transportation Research Forum, Toronto, Ontario, 
May 30-June 2. 
Hossain S.Q., Ibrahim W.H.W., Adhikary K.S., Rezaur R.B (2005). Proceedings of the Eastern 
Asia Society for Transportation Studies, Vol. 5, pp. 65 – 74. 
Johan, B.A., & Dawson, N.E. (1987). Youth and risk: Age differences in risky driving, risk 
perception, and risk utility. Alcohol Drugs Driving, 3. 
Ross, A. (1998). Road safety in developing countries, Highways and Transportation, April, pp. 
26-28. 
 
 
    Appendix A 
    Questionnaire 
 
Islamic University of Technology 
Dept. of Civil & Environmental Engineering 
 
[Hello. I am a Civil & Environmental Engineering student at the Islamic University of 
Technology.  I am conducting interviews to collect information for a conference paper. The 
survey is about Undergraduate University Student’s Perception of Pedestrian Safety. Participation 
as a respondent is entirely voluntary. You can stop the interview at any time and can chose to not 
answer any question or questions. The interview is entirely anonymous. You are not asked for any 
name or address information – and no such information is sought – in order to ensure anonymity.] 
 
Interview No: ________      Date: _____ 
 
696 
 
(Please answer the following questions based on your walking experience. Please check one 
response to each question.) 
 
1. While walking, how often do you feel that crossing street is dangerous? 
[ ] Almost always  [ ] Usually [ ] Occasionally  [ ] Rarely 
 
2. While walking, how often do you feel that crossing street is not safe because of fast-moving 
automobiles on the street? 
[ ] Almost always  [ ] Usually [ ] Occasionally  [ ] Rarely 
 
3. While crossing street near an intersection without traffic control devices or on midblock 
without crossing facilities, how often do you feel it’s unsafe to cross? 
[ ] Almost always  [ ] Usually [ ] Occasionally  [ ] Rarely 
 
4. While walking on a side-walk just alongside a street (without buffer zone), how often do you 
feel that a fast moving car could lose control and swerve into you? 
[ ] Almost always  [ ] Usually [ ] Occasionally  [ ] Rarely 
 
5. How often do you feel that it’s still dangerous walking on the sidewalk with buffer zone (such 
as trees, roadside parking etc.) because of cars entering driveways? 
[ ] Almost always  [ ] Usually [ ] Occasionally  [ ] Rarely 
 
6. While walking through a way without any walking facilities (e.g. parking lot, alongside street 
without sidewalk), how often do you feel it’s safe to do so? 
[ ] Almost always  [ ] Usually [ ] Occasionally  [ ] Rarely 
 
7. How often do you feel that hawkers occupy the road and let you enter the remaining narrow 
road with danger of collision with moving vehicle?  
[ ] Almost always  [ ] Usually [ ] Occasionally  [ ] Rarely 
 
8. How often do you feel that there need to be installed a zebra crossing or underpass or overpass 
along your crossing zone? 
[ ] Almost always  [ ] Usually [ ] Occasionally  [ ] Rarely 
 
9. While crossing street along ‘zebra crossing’, how often do you feel it is unsafe? 
[ ] Almost always  [ ] Usually [ ] Occasionally  [ ] Rarely 
 
10. While crossing street showing your own hand signal, how often do you feel that vehicles 
would not stop? 
[ ] Almost always  [ ] Usually [ ] Occasionally  [ ] Rarely 
 
11. While walking on footpath how often do you feel entering of the motor-cycle in the footpath 
can drive over you? 
[ ] Almost always  [ ] Usually [ ] Occasionally  [ ] Rarely 
 
12. How often do you feel that the footpath is narrow to use comfortably? 
[ ] Almost always  [ ] Usually [ ] Occasionally  [ ] Rarely 
697 
 
13. While walking along the road how often do you feel the tension of danger/accident due to 
presence of unprotected manhole? 
[ ] Almost always  [ ] Usually [ ] Occasionally  [ ] Rarely   
 
14. How often do you feel that street lighting is not sufficient during crossing the roads or 
walking along the sideways? 
[ ] Almost always  [ ] Usually [ ] Occasionally  [ ] Rarely 
 
 
 (Please answer the following questions) 
 
1. What is your sex?  [ ] Male [ ] Female 
 
2. Which age group do you belong to? 
 [ ] below 18 [ ] 19 to 20 [ ] 21 to 22 [ ] 23+  
 
3. What is your household annual income before tax? 
[ ] Less than BDT.15000         [ ] BDT.15001 to BDT.25000   
[ ] BDT.25001 to BDT.35000     [ ] BDT.35001 to 50000       [ ] More than BDT.50000 
 
4. How many people’s including yourself live in your household? ________ 
 
5. Do you have a valid driver’s license?  [ ] Yes   [ ] No 
 
6. How many cars (including trucks and vans) are available to use for your household?  ___ 
 
7. You are: [ ] 1st year Undergraduate Student [ ] 2nd year Undergraduate Student 
[ ] 3rd year Undergraduate Student [ ] 4th year Undergraduate Student 
 
8. What is your area of study? 
 [ ] Engineering    [ ] Science    [ ] Medical science    [ ] Business / Commerce 
 [ ] Social Science/Humanities/Arts  [ ] Others (Please specify)  
 
9. What is your usual mode of travel? 
[ ] Private Car/Microbus/pick-up/jeep          [ ] Transit(Bus, Commuter train, Tempo)     
[ ] CNG, Taxi Cab    [ ] Walking    [ ] Bicycle, Rickshaw    [ ]Motorcycle 
 
10. On an average how many hours do you walk in a week? 
[ ] Less than 1.5 hours [ ] 1.5 to 3 hours  [ ] 3 to 4.5 hours   
[ ] 4.5 to 6 hours  [ ] 6 to 7.5 hours  [ ] More than 7.5 hours 
 
11. Have you ever involved with an accident while walking? 
[ ] Yes    [ ] No 
 
12. Have you ever seen a pedestrian being involved with an accident? 
[ ] Yes    [ ] No 
 
 
 
698 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
GREEN ROOF: A RELIEF IN DENSE URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
Sudipta Barua1 and Ashik Ikbal2  
 
 
ABSTRACT: Urban greening improves the visual, aesthetic and livability aspect of the built-
environment and has an increasing investment opportunity for urban future. Green roof, to some 
extent, counteract the high urban dense development. As green design practices, green roof has 
become an increasingly important landscape means essential for healthy living and well-being of 
the urban dwellers. Green roofs have great potential to lessen cities ecological footprints 
enhancing urban ecosystem services like conserves energy and biodiversity, reduces air pollution 
and runoff, promotes urban agriculture. Also creates spaces for social interaction, natural respite 
for urbanites, thereby reduces urban stress. With brisk and spontaneous urbanization process, 
high population concentration, land use changes, loss of green spaces, cities like Dhaka are 
increasingly facing challenges to cope with heat island effects, storm water runoff, air pollution, 
and habitat shift. Objective of this paper is to search for a practical and attainable answer to 
safeguard the built environment of Dhaka.  The green roof and its practice is relatively a new 
idea in urban landscaping of Dhaka.  In an attempt to set off the green roof practices, this paper 
looked at the contemporary practices of green roof in Dhaka. The significance of this study is 
found in the exigency for a combination of environmentally aware public, scientific research for 
both technology and means and social and political environment to promote green roof practice 
in Dhaka.  
 
 
1. Urban Development and Green Roof 
 
Cities are in the transition of urbanization process, and undoubtedly overwhelmed by the 
urbanization challenges worldwide. In cities of developing countries urbanization dominantly 
exhibits land use/cover changes which is profound, and unprecedented. This widespread change 
is additionally triggered by rural-flight seeking social mobility, diverse economic opportunities, 
and better lifestyle in cities. The drive for rapid pace of urban growth particularly of developing 
countries has resulted in spontaneous urban development resulting substantial reduction of arable 
lands and open spaces (green spaces, water bodies), habitat destruction and biodiversity loss. 
Consequently cities are increasingly facing challenges to cope with heat island effects, storm 
water runoff, air pollution, and habitat shift. 
 
                                                        
1Assistant Professor, Department of Architecture, American International University Bangladesh (AIUB), 
Banani, Dhaka, Bangladesh. sudipta@aiub.edu, baruasudipta@gmail.com  
2Assistant Professor, Department of Architecture, American International University Bangladesh (AIUB), 
Banani, Dhaka, Bangladesh. ashik-ikbal@aiub.edu, ashik.binc@gmail.com 
 
 
699 
 
The fastest growing metropolis of Bangladesh, Dhaka is no exception. Dhaka has long been 
popularly known as one of the fastest growing capital city with its unique characteristics of over 
crowd, continual rural-flights, overwhelming poverty. Last few decades of urbanization and high 
population growth of Dhaka has caused significant decline of agricultural lands, green spaces, 
and water bodies due to indiscriminate land use/cover change. A single plot with single residence 
then having a green lawn in front today is transformed into high-rise dwellings. Recent land 
cover maps revealed that the ‘flood-free’ areas are already occupied; therefore the rising demand 
for urban land is being met up by converting the low lying lands and vegetation covers (Figure 1), 
which is leading to the substantial loss of scarce natural resources and habitat fragmentation 
(Dewan et al., 2010). This also contributes to the increase of city’s ecological footprint. The 
encroachment and filling up of water bodies by the land grabbers, real estate agencies are largely 
attributed to the alarming increase of impervious surfaces causing high storm water runoff during 
rainy season, and growing vulnerability to urban heat stress. The uncontrolled urbanization has 
havocked healthy living destroying places to socialize; contact with nature, engage in physical 
activities like playing, strolling, jogging. Ensuing social and environmental destituteness is 
vanishing Dhaka’s potential as living space. This demands rethinking how we think about our 
built environment. 
 
 
Figure 1 Significant reduction of natural lands and consequent increase in urban land  
Source: Dewan et. al., 2010 
 
The motivation of this paper lies in the search for a way to shape long range future sustainability 
of Dhaka. In dense urban development, rooftops are the only enormous untapped urban resources 
available to safeguard the built environment. The conventional uses of the rooftops are drying 
cloth, fruits, pickles etc., flying kite, playing, social gatherings, chatting, gardening etc. 
Contemporary approaches to greening buildings are characterized by the integration of planting 
and it’s supporting structures with the construction of the building itself (Kingsbury & Dunnett, 
2004). Fundamentally green plants are widely recognized as therapeutic. Plants provide habitat 
for urban wildlife. Green plants act as natural filters, increase city’s biomass, counteract the 
climatic changes, and regulate the indoor climates of buildings by insulation against extreme heat 
 
 
700 
 
and cold (Mowla, 2005a). Green roof as an innovative approach to roofing is a holistic 
sustainability strategy for healthier and responsive built environment. 
   To view our built environment as more than a collection of buildings the study focuses in 
understanding the social and environmental significance of green roofs might play in urban 
sustainability. As an effort to promote this green design practice the prevailing green roofs of 
Dhaka are studied. 
 
 
2. Green Roof as a Holistic Sustainability Strategy 
 
The modern movement of green roof initiated at ‘70s; has become widely popular in 
contemporary times. Green roof is innovative roofing to - curb air pollution, reduce water and 
energy consumption, reduce storm water runoff, preserve biodiversity, enhance beauty, provide 
amenities adding a decidedly earthy element to urban untapped rooftop. Through environmental 
interventions green roofs provide an educational tool to the public. In the quest to create a more 
sustainable built environment and inviting the harmony of nature back in city, green roof 
showcases beauty, efficiency and performance.  
  Green roof is a holistic sustainability strategy that provides a wide range of social, economic 
and environmental benefits to multiple stakeholders including developers and owners, 
municipalities, the building occupants and the community. To name a few, through installation 
costs, rental impacts, operational costs green roof offers benefits to developers and owners. 
Municipalities receive benefits of reduced infrastructure maintenance or replacement costs. 
Improved aesthetics, biodiversity, and/or employment opportunities are offered by green roof to 
the community, and the building occupants enjoy productivity gains, and/or improved 
psychological and physical well-being from green roofs (Friedberg & Brien, 2011).  
   Green roof demonstrates urban environmental alternatives that mitigate storm water runoff, 
heat-island effects and reduce energy loads. Green roof is widely considered as a key component 
of ‘green infrastructure’ to manage the urban water cycle. The substantial indirect benefit 
received from green roof is the mitigation of heat-island effect. At the city-scale, the addition of 
green roofs can have an economic benefit reducing the surrounding temperatures – the savings 
from energy costs as a result of reducing building energy loads.  
   The addition of green roofs, particularly at urban scale can have more qualitative than 
quantitative benefits – adding biodiversity back into dense urban environment. The preservation 
of biodiversity potential of green roof, particularly birds, bees, insects and plants, supports urban 
agriculture. Agricultural benefits generated from green roofs may potentially address the issue of 
urban food security. In addition, they serve as a useful source of employment for the urban poor.  
The absorption, temperature cooling and sequestration ability of green roof may help to mitigate 
air pollution. The acoustical benefits from green roofs through noise mitigation can be only 
received by the buildings below highways or high air traffic areas (Friedberg & Brien, 2011). 
   The aesthetic potentials of green roof may help enhancing visual, artistic and qualitative value 
of the built environment. The addition of variety of plants with fragrant blossoms and colorful 
foliage in green roof may stimulate the senses and allow the urban dwellers to relax and 
rejuvenate. Green roofs with usability and accessibility can be an exciting public space for all age 
group to gather, stroll, play and enjoy nature. Green roofs, in contrast to barren roofs, may also 
offer accepted visibility to the neighboring buildings. The potentials of therapeutic values of 
green roof enhance quality-of life reducing stress and increasing positive feelings. 
   The capital costs, maintenance costs of a green roof are major factors for a developer or 
 
 
701 
 
building owner. The significant savings through energy use and storm water runoff fees, and by 
broadening the scope financial return through rental impacts, community benefits, productivity 
etc., the financial viability of green roofs compared to barren roof reduces the potential risk of 
acceptance (Friedberg & Brien, 2011). Following a number of researches on installation, 
effectiveness and performances, green roof has earned the recognition from architects, engineers, 
landscape designers as well as the clients worldwide. This increasingly attractive green roof is a 
key to protecting urban future. 
 
 
3. Green Roofs in Dhaka 
 
In urban landscaping of Dhaka, green roof is relatively a new idea and is still way behind in terms 
of practice. In Dhaka, greenery in planters is the most common and conventional form of green 
practice (Figure 2). The practice of green roof has already begun in Dhaka, a very few in numbers 
though. There are both extensive and Intensive green roofs on institutional, hospital, commercial, 
private residences and multi-unit residential developments. However, the green roofs are mainly 
designed to have visual and aesthetic benefits. And offer spaces for the owners preferably, for 
relaxing, strolling, gathering, playing and enjoying contact with nature, and for the building 
occupants in some cases. 
 
 
Figure 2 Greenery on planters - the most common and conventional form of green practice 
Source: Author 2010 
 
3.1 Institutional Buildings 
The extensive green roof (Figure 3) of the United International University at Dhanmondhi is west 
faced and occupies about 13% of roof area of approx. 3500sft. The raised bed of flower plants 
partly outlines the roof and the grass bed is alongside the office space. The green roof contributes 
to visual and aesthetic benefits to the owners and reduction of air temperatures and glare to a 
degree. 
 
3.2 Commercial Buildings 
There is an extensive green roof on the Bell Tower at Dhanmondi providing frontal to the 
cafeteria and conference room. Same rooftop layout is found in the World Bank Dhaka Office at 
Aagargaon with an intensive green roof. The addition of green roofs on commercial buildings 
 
 
702 
 
serves as places for intimacy and lingering, for lunch and official gathering of the employees. 
Restaurant and/or café with small green roof (Figure 4) offer guests to relax and enjoy dinning 
near to the sky. 
 
 
Figure 3 Green roof of the United International University 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4 Café lounge with Green roof and extensive green roof on Commercial Building 
 
3.3 Hospital buildings 
To receive the therapeutic benefits of green roofs, the Square Hospital located at the west 
Panthapath, has incorporated green roofs into the design of building. The green roof is placed at 
the 7th level. The design is aimed to enhance the healing process of patients. The intensive green 
roof consists of pathway, shaded seating and raised bed (Figure 5). Patients can relax and enjoy 
the comfort, fresh air, and landscape while restoring their health in dense urban surroundings of 
the hospital. 
 
 
Figure 5 Green roof of the Square Hospital 
 
 
703 
 
3.4 Private Residences 
The green roof of Meghna Residence (Figure 6) at multiple levels, designed by architect Rafiq 
Azam, hosts a variety of interesting features. Each dwelling space is attached to gardens to 
maximize summer wind and winter sun creating the sense of sharing among residents. Plants act 
as a screen for the overall façade, reducing heat gain of the indoors. Another key element of this 
roof is the harmonious integration of pond inducing nature at sky level. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6 Multi-level Green roof of Megna Residence 
Source Shatotto Architecture for Green Living 
 
3.5 Multi-unit Residences 
The addition of green roof in multi-unit residential buildings by real estate developers serves the 
building occupants as gathering space to socialize and relax in nature (Figure 7). The design 
intends to nurture relationships among occupants, and build sense of belongingness. The visual 
and aesthetic value of green roof accounts for a high rent of these units. The plantation types 
include fragrant flower garden, grass bed, non-toxic and attractive plants. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7 Green of Multi-Unit Residences developed by Real Estate Developers 
 
 
4. Conclusion 
 
In summary – even though the green roof as a thought relatively new, and  even though its 
practice is trivial in urban landscaping of Dhaka compare to global practice – the study shows 
that the incorporation of green roof into design of the study buildings take credit for becoming 
green spots in concrete jungle of Dhaka. The study projects bring new potential to building and 
barren space - the rooftop by offering natural respite to urbanites from the harsh urban 
environment. The projects introduce a forward-looking sustainability strategy. The learning of the 
study stretches our boundaries of holistic, cross-disciplinary understanding of green roof as an 
 
 
704 
 
increasingly important landscape means to help Dhaka to address its sustainability challenges.  
In recent years, many cities around the world are mandating green roof on new commercial, 
institutional, and multi-unit residential developments. We must move forward to widen green roof 
practice in Dhaka and encourage creating a more sustainable built environment. Our critical 
challenges are to: 
 Articulate the message of multiple benefits of green roof among architects, construction 
engineers, planners, urban managers, real estate developers to expand green roof practice and 
their collaboration to address the urban sustainability challenges the booming building 
industry encounters. 
 Build environmentally aware public and informing them of effectiveness of green roof 
incorporation into building design worth multiple values of building and quality to their lives. 
 Creation of social and political environment to officially recognize and to amend green roof 
to the building code. 
 Strengthen the support to developing effective public policy, holistic approaches to 
researching, and to building tools to assess values and performances of green roofs. 
   However, this paper on the values of green roof as a valuable asset in dense urban 
environment only stretches our boundaries of understanding – the greater feasibility in Dhaka 
context is yet to be explored. We are already designing our environment. Hence the design of 
built environment should consciously rethink the critical interaction of built and natural 
environment, and humankind from wide range of perspectives: urban identity, social demands, 
quality of space, urban complexity and public life.  
 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
The authors appreciate the efforts of 3rd year students of Architecture department of AIUB in 
documenting green roofs of Dhaka as part of their academic exercise in 2011 and sharing 
information and photographs (Figure 3, 4, 5 & 7). We are also thankful to the respected reviewers 
for their valuable comments.  
 
 
References  
 
Dewan, A. M., Yamaguchi, Y. & Rahman, Md. Z., (2010), Dynamics of Land use/cover Changes 
and The Analysis of Landscape Fragmentation in Dhaka Metropolitan, Bangladesh, Geo Journal: 
Spatially Integrated Social Sciences and Humanities, Springer, The Netherlands, Published 
online, 14 December, 2010. 
Friedberg, A., & Brien, J., (2011), Green Roof LCA, in Living Architecture Monitor, Fall 2011, 
Vol. 13, No 4 [online] http://www.nxtbook.com/dawson/greenroofs/lam_2011fall/ [November 
28,2011] 
Kingsbury, N., and Dunnett, N., (2004), Planting Green Roofs and Living Walls, Timber Press, 
Portland, Oregon, pp. 3, 16-17.  
Mowla, Q.A. (2005a): Ecological Imperatives for Sustainable Environment, Proc. International 
Conference on Geography and Environment – Issues and Challenges, Dhaka, Bangladesh, Dec 9-
11, 2005. 
705 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
DETERMINATION OF SOIL BEARING CAPACITY AND DESIGN OF SHALLOW 
FOUNDATION BY VISUAL BASIC 
 
 
Shantana Sheikh1 and A.Z.M Sanaul Haque2 
 
 
ABSTRACT: The research work presents the prediction of soil-bearing capacity and design of 
shallow foundation by Visual Basic. There are several methods of calculating load bearing capacity. 
This work consider two methods, such as Terzaghi’s method  and Meyerhof’s method, that means 
determination of soil-bearing capacity using equations proposed by Terzaghi and Meyerhof. Using 
the value of bearing capacity the foundation type and depth can be selected. In this research the 
design of single column and combined footing is done. Construction of shallow foundation is more 
economical and easier. But manual calculation required more time. So, in the research the application 
of Visual Basic is done for the design.It also been formulated for rectangular footings without central 
beam. However, the design of slab type rectangular combined footing has been discussed and 
presented in this paper. Reinforcement drawing for the single footing and the slab type 
rectangular combined footing with bar arrangements has also been developed so that an 
engineer can carryout the work easily at site. From the results it can be seen that accuracy of 
result is ensured in comparison with manual calculation. Therefore, one of the most 
mentionable goals of this research was to get a sustainable, economical and time saving 
solution of the shallow foundation design problem and soil-bearing capacity using Visual 
Basic programming. 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
The ultimate load which a foundation can support may be calculated using bearing capacity theory. 
The ultimate bearing capacity of a foundation is calculated from an equation that incorporates 
appropriate soil parameters (e.g. shear strength, unit weight) and details about the size, shape and 
founding depth of the footing. Footing belongs to the category of shallow foundations and is used 
when soil of sufficient strength is available within a short depth below the ground level. The shallow 
foundation has a large plan area in comparison with the cross sectional area of the column it 
                                               
1Lecturer, Department of Civil Engineering, Stamford University Bangladesh, Dhaka, Bangladesh. 
sheikh_ruet@yahoo.com 
2Junior Engineer, Institute of Water Modelling, Dhaka, Bangladesh.  
azm@iwmbd.org 
706 
 
supports. However, in some cases, it may not be convenient to provide separate isolated footings for 
the columns and hence, combined footing for columns are provided. With the advent of personal 
computers, the application of computers has increased tremendously in the analysis/design of civil 
engineering structures and many other fields. The paper illustrates the application of computer for 
carrying out the design of combined footings using Microsoft (MS) visual basic software. The 
problem has been formulated for determination of soil-bearing capacity using Terzaghi’s bearing 
capacity equation and Meyerhof’s bearing capacity equation. It also been formulated for rectangular 
footings without central beam. However, the design of slab type rectangular combined footing has 
been discussed and presented in detail. 
 
 
2. Objective of the Work 
Determination of soil bearing capacity and foundation design based on hand calculation is so much 
time consuming. In this case the development of visual basic programming is very effective. The 
main objectives of the present study are as follows: 
 
(i) To determine the bearing capacity of soil using hand calculation and visual basic. 
(ii) To study how to develop visual basic programming. 
(iii) To design single column footing and combined footing by hand calculation and visual 
basic. 
(iv) To investigate the benefit of using visual basic instead of hand calculation. 
 
 
3. Scope of the Work 
Civil Engineering is a field of construction work. Varieties of structures are constructed here. Not 
only construction but also stability of these structures is very important. The factor which governs the 
stability of structure is the soil-bearing capacity on which the substructure stands. The choice of the 
type of foundation, shallow or deep largely depends on the soil condition. If the bearing capacity is 
high it requires shallow foundation which proves to be not only economical but also easy to 
construct. But manually, determination of bearing capacity and design of combined footing both 
required hard work and lengthy of time. In this case, computer programming solution can be a great 
effort. Among many of them Visual Basic is one. Application of Visual Basic in the determination of 
soil-bearing capacity and design of shallow foundation makes it easier and faster. So, there is no 
other comparison of computer base solution in the design of structures. 
707 
 
4. Soil Bearing Capacity 
Building loads are transmitted by columns, bearing walls, or by other bearing member to 
foundations. The lowest part of a structure is generally referred to as the foundation. Its function is to 
transfer the load of a structure to the soil on which it is resting. A properly designed foundation 
transfers the load throughout the soil without overstressing the soil. Overstressing the soil can result 
in either excessive settlement or shear failure of the soil, both of which cause damage to the structure. 
Thus, geotechnical and structural engineers who design foundations must evaluate the bearing 
capacity of soil. The supporting power of a soil or rock is referred to as its bearing capacity. 
The term bearing capacity is defined after attaching certain qualifying prefixes, as defined below: 
 
Gross Pressure Intensity (q): It is the total pressure at the base of the footing due to the weight of the 
superstructure, self-weight of the footing and the weight of the earth fill, if any. 
 
Net Pressure Intensity (qn): It is defined as the excess pressure, or the difference in intensities of the 
gross pressure after the construction of the structure and the original overburden pressure. Thus, if D 
is the depth of footing 
 
   qn = q – γD      (1) 
 
where γ is the average unit of soil above the foundation base. 
 
Ultimate Bearing Capacity (qu): It is defined as the minimum gross pressure intensity at the base of 
the foundation at which soil fails in shear. 
 
Net Ultimate Bearing Capacity (qnu): It is the minimum pressure intensity causing shear failure in 
soil. 
qnu = qu -σ'      (2) 
Where σ' is the effective surcharge at the base level of the foundation. 
Effective surcharge at the base level of the foundation (σ'): It is the intensity of vertical pressure at 
the base level of the foundation, computed assuming total unit weight for the portion of the soil 
above the water table and submerged unit weight for the portion below the water table. 
 
Net Safe Bearing Capacity (qns): It is the net ultimate bearing capacity divided by a factor of safety 
F. 
    
 
 
708 
 
Safe Bearing Capacity (qs): The maximum pressure which the soil can carry safely without risk of 
shear failure is called the safe bearing capacity. 
 
   qs = qns + γD      (3) 
 
Allowable Bearing Capacity (qall): It is the net loading intensity at which neither the soil fails in 
shear nor there is excessive settlement detrimental to the structure. 
 
4.1 Soil-Bearing Capacity for Shallow Foundation 
 
To perform satisfactorily, shallow foundations must have two main characteristics: 
1. The foundation has to be changed against overall shear failure in the soil that supports it. 
2. The foundation cannot undergo excessive displacement, that is, settlement. (The term 
excessive is relative, because the degree of settlement allowable for a structure depends on 
several considerations.) 
 
4.2 Bearing Capacity Theories 
4.2.1 Terzaghi’s Bearing Capacity Theory  
Terzaghi (1943) was the first to present a comprehensive theory for the evaluation of the ultimate 
bearing capacity of rough shallow foundation. According to this theory a foundation is shallow if the 
depth, Df, of the foundation is less than or equal to the width of the foundation. 
Terzaghi expressed the ultimate bearing capacity in the form 
 
qu = cNc + qNq + 0.5 γBNγ   (strip foundation) (4) 
 
where  c = cohesion of soil 
  γ = unit weight of soil 
q = γDf 
Nc, Nq, Nγ = bearing capacity factors that are nondimensional and are only functions of the soil 
friction angle, Φ 
For estimating the ultimate bearing capacity of square or circular foundations, 
 
qu = 1.3 cNc + qNq + 0.4 γBNγ (square foundation) (5) 
qu = 1.3 cNc + qNq + 0.3 γBNγ (circular foundation) (6) 
In equation (5), B equals the dimension of each side of the foundation; in equation (6), B equals the 
diameter of the foundation. 
For foundations that exhibit the local shear failure mode in soils, Terzaghi suggested modifications to 
equations (4), (5), and (6) as follows: 
709 
 
 
qu = 0.667cNc' + qNq' + 0.5 γBNγ'  (strip foundation) (7) 
qu = 0.867 cNc' + qNq' + 0.4 γBNγ'    (square foundation) (8) 
qu = 0.867cNc' + qNq' + 0.3 γBNγ'   (circular foundation) (9) 
Nc', Nq', Nγ' are the modified bearing capacity factors. They can be calculated by using the bearing 
capacity factors equations by replacing Φ by Φ' = tan-1(2/3tanΦ).  
4.2.2 Meyerhof’s Bearing Capacity Theory 
Meyerhof (1963) suggested the following form of the general bearing capacity equation: 
 
qu = cNcFcsFcdFci + qNqFqsFqdFqi + 0.5γ BNγFγsFγdFγi   (10)  
 
where  c = cohesion 
  q = effective stress at the level of the bottom of the foundation. 
  γ = unit weight of soil 
  B = width of foundation (= diameter for a circular foundation) 
  Fcs, Fqs, Fγs = Shape factors    
Fcd,Fqd,Fγd = Depth factors 
Fci,Fqi,Fγi = Inclination factors 
Nc, Nq, Nγ = bearing capacity factors 
The soil- bearing capacity equation for a strip footing can be modified for general use for 
incorporating the following factors: 
Table 1 Shape, depth and inclination factors 
Factor Relationship Source 
Shape Fcs = 1+(B/L)(Nq/Nc) 
Fqs = 1+(B/L)(tanΦ) 
Fγs = 1-0.4(B/L) 
Where L = Length of the foundation 
(L> B) 
 
De Beer (1970) 
Hansen (1970) 
Depth  Condition (a): Df/B ≤ 1  
Fcd = 1+0.4(Df/B) 
Fqd = 1+2tanΦ(1- sinΦ)²(Df/B)  
Fγd = 1 
Hansen (1970) 
Inclination Fci = Fqi =(1-β/90°)² 
Fγi = (1-β/Φ)² 
 
Meyerhof (1963); 
Hanna and Meyerhof 
(1981) 
 Where β = inclination of the load on 
the Foundation with respect to the 
vertical 
 
710 
 
5. Shallow Foundations 
 
According to Terzaghi, a foundation is shallow if the depth, Df, of the foundation is less than or equal 
to the width of the foundation. Later investigators, however, have suggested that foundations with Df  
equal to 3-4 times the width of the foundation may be defined as shallow foundations. Shallow 
foundations are used when subsoil exploration proves that all soil strata affected by the building 
could resist the superimposed stresses (Dp) without causing excessive settlements. Shallow 
foundations are either footings or rafts. 
 
5.1 Footings 
 
Footing foundation is one of the oldest and most popular type of shallow foundations. A footing is an 
enlargement of the base of a column or wall for the purpose of distributing the load on the supporting 
soil at a pressure suiting its properties.  
 
5.2. Choice of the Type of Foundation 
The choice of the appropriate type of foundation is governed by some important factors such as  
Punmia et al (1970) 
1. The nature of the structure 
2.    The loads exerted by the structure  
3. The subsoil characteristics 
                         4.    The allotted cost of foundations 
Therefore to decide about the type of foundation, subsoil exploration must be carried out. 
  
5.3. Types of Shallow Foundations 
The shallow foundations are of the following types: 
a) Wall Footing 
b) Spread Footing                                     
c) Combined Footing 
d) Mat or Raft Footing 
 
 
Figure 1 various types of shallow foundation 
711 
 
5.4. Combined Footing 
The preceding section presented elements of the design of spread and wall footings. This section 
considers some of the more complicated shallow-foundation problems. Among these are footings 
supporting more than one column in a line (combined footings), which may be rectangular or 
trapezoidal in shape, or two pads connected by a beam, as for a strap footing. Eccentrically loaded 
footings and un-symmetrically shaped footings will also be considered.Portar(2008) 
 
 
Figure 2 Construction of a combined footing 
 
5.5. Types of Combined Footing 
 
Combined footings are classified according to their shape. They are 
(a) Rectangular Combined Footing 
(b) Trapezoidal Combined Footing 
(c) Strap or Cantilever  Footing 
 
 
6. Introduction to Visual Basic Programming 
Visual Basic enables a disciplined approach to computer-program design. In this chapter, we 
introduced Visual Basic programming and present examples that illustrate several important features 
of the language.  
 
6.1. How to Create a Project in Visual Basic Language 
 
Suppose we want to create a simple project, addition of two values. Although we will create a 
complete functional Project with controls and code and so on, the purpose of this exercise is to show 
what can be done. If we study this example we should be able to relate it to what we already know of 
programming and judge whether this tutorial will be easy or hard for us to do. 
First thing to do is to create a Directory where we will store all our Visual Basic Projects. Call it 
Visual Basic Apps, for example. Then start Visual Basic. The first screen will ask whether we want 
to open a new project or an existing one - it's obviously a new one and it will be a Standard EXE. 
712 
 
Then, maximize all the windows (it's easier to work with - some of the examples in the tutorial had to 
be reduced for the sake of the presentation). Now, save your project. Amolo (2008). Figure 3, 4, 
5,6,7,8 illustrate the step by step progress of a Visual Basic project. 
 
 
Figure 3 Opening form of Visual Basic 
 
Figure 4 Properties window 
 
Figure 5 Toolbox 
 
713 
 
 
Figure 6 A project form 
 
Figure 7 A form of code 
 
Figure 8 Form after compilation of program 
714 
 
7. Results and Discussion 
 
In a Visual Basic, hundreds of complex problems can be solved in a very short time, while hand 
made calculations are time consuming and hard labor is required, not only that sometimes it becomes 
very complex. But, not only simplicity and speed, accuracy of result is also a vital issue. In this 
chapter, we will observe that, how much accurate the result in Visual Basic is in comparison with 
hand calculation. 
 
7.1 Determination of bearing capacity of soil 
 
7.1.1. Bearing Capacity Using Terzaghi’s Equation 
In this section we determine the bearing capacity of soil using Terzaghi’s bearing capacity equation 
for different types of single column footing. In table 2 comparisons of Visual Basic result and hand 
made calculation is done. 
 
Table 2 Variation in Bearing Capacity Result for spread footing (Terzaghi) 
Types of foundation Calculation method Ultimate bearing 
capacity(psf) 
Allowable bearing 
capacity(psf) 
Circular 46154.025 11538.51 
Square 48765.1 12191.275 
Rectangular 48765.1 12191.275 
Strip footing 
 
Hand calculation 
45832.175 11458.04 
Circular 46154.025 11538.5063 
Square 48765.1 12191.275 
Rectangular 48765.1 12191.275 
Strip footing 
 
Visual Basic result 
45832.175 11458.0438 
 
7.1.2. Bearing Capacity Using Meyerhof’s Equation 
In this section we determine the bearing capacity of soil using Meyerhof’s bearing capacity equation 
for both shallow and deep foundation. In table 3 comparisons of Visual Basic result and hand made 
calculation is done. 
 
Table 3 Variation in Bearing Capacity Result for shallow foundation (Meyerhof) 
 
Bearing capacity 
factors 
Bearing capacity (psf) Result from hand 
calculation Visual Basic result 
qu 17227.73 17185.0599 Factors from equation 
qall 4306.93 4296.2649 
 
 
715 
 
7.1. Verification in Design Results 
 
7.2.1. Design of Single Footing With Concentrated Load (square) 
In this section we design single column square footing. In table 4 comparisons of Visual Basic result 
and hand made calculation is done. 
 
Table 4 Design Result of Single Footing (square) 
 
Reinforcement 
type 
Design  Provided Steel area 
(in²) Bar size (#) 
No. of 
bar 
By hand calculation 7.27 #7 13 Main 
reinforcement By Visual Basic 7.267 #7 13 
By hand calculation 1.62 #8 4 Dowel bar 
By Visual Basic 1.62 #8 4 
 
7.2.2. Rectangular 
In this section we design single column rectangular footing. Later in table 5 comparisons of Visual 
Basic result and hand made calculation is done. 
 
Table 5 Design Result of Single Footing (Rectangular) 
 
Reinforcement  Design  Provided Steel area (in²) Bar size (#) No. of bar 
By hand calculation 7.93 #7 14 Longer direction 
By Visual Basic 7.91 #7 14 
By hand calculation 8.82 #7 16 Shorter direction 
By Visual Basic 8.82 #7 16 
 
7.2.3. Design of Rectangular Combined Footing 
In this section we design rectangular combined footing. In table respectively 6, 7 comparisons of 
Visual Basic result and hand made calculation is done. 
 
Table 6 Reinforcement in Longer Direction (Rectangular Combined Footing) 
 
Moment type Design Required Steel 
area (in²) 
Provided 
Steel area 
(in²)  
Bar size (#) 
No. of 
bar 
By hand calculation 9.22 10.40 #9 11 (-ve) moment 
By Visual Basic 9.23 10.40 #9 11 
By hand calculation 2.52 10.40 #9 11 (+ve) moment 
By Visual Basic 2.52 10.40 #9 11 
 
716 
 
 
Table 7 Reinforcement in Shorter Direction (Rectangular Combined Footing) 
 
Column type Design RequiredSteel 
area (in²) 
Provided Steel area 
(in²) 
Bar size 
(#) 
No. of bar 
By hand 
calculation 1.38 8.31 #9 
9 Interior 
column 
By Visual 
Basic 1.39 8.2933 #9 
9 
By hand 
calculation 0.92 4.875 #9 
5 Exterior 
column 
By Visual 
Basic 0.92 4.9238 #9 
5 
By hand 
calculation 20.16 20.16 #9 
21 Between two 
column 
By Visual 
Basic 20.1498 20.1498 #9 
21 
 
7.3. Discussion 
 
The main objective of our research work is the accuracy of the result obtained from Visual Basic. 
From the analysis of the result it is seen that, the result verification is very much negligible. So, the 
objective of the research work is fulfilled.  
 
8.  Conclusion 
 
To get a technically feasible and economically sustainable structure selection of suitable types of 
foundation is very important. For this the determination of bearing capacity of soil is essential. After 
that, selection of foundation type becomes easier. In the research work we apply Visual Basic both 
for the determination of soil bearing capacity and design of foundation (single and combined 
footing).From the analysis of the result obtained from Visual Basic and hand made calculation, we 
see that they are very much similar. So, the design is very much accurate and it can be done within a 
short time. Thus the application of Visual Basic in various structural design in civil engineering field 
proves to be more convenient, easier and safety of time and labor. 
 
9. Future Recommendation of the Study 
Based on this study, the following recommendations can be made for future work: 
1. To investigate the effect of eccentricity of loading on the design of footing by Visual 
Basic. 
2. To develop a numerical solution for the design of trapezoidal combined footing. 
3. To develop a numerical solution for the design of mat foundation. 
717 
 
4. To develop a numerical solution of qualitative diagram of bending moment and shear 
force diagram. 
 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
First, our outmost gratitude goes to ALLAH, the almighty, without whose mercy andblessing, this 
work would not have been possible. We are grateful and would like to express our sincere gratitude 
to our supervisor, Dr. Syed Abdul Mofiz, Professor, Department of Civil Engineering of Rajshahi 
University of Engineering & Technology, Rajshahi, for his outstanding cooperation, constructive 
suggestion, valuable guidance, encouragement offered and for his vision and experience that unable 
us to successfully complete this work. Most helpful was his patience and ingenious ways of steering 
us in the right direction, as we often tended to drift during the course of this research. 
 
Referencs 
American Concrete Institute: “Structural design of spread footings” 
BS: 8004. “Factor of safety and Presumed bearing values”, Vol. 13, pp. 121-122. 
BS: 8004. “Strip Footing”, Vol. 13, pp. 169-170. 
Das B. M.  (1984) “Soil-Bearing Capacity for Shallow Foundation”, Principles of Foundation 
Engineering, Vol.4, pp.152-153. 
Das B. M. (1984). “Terzaghi’s Bearing Capacity Theory”, Principles of Foundation Engineering, 
Vol.4, pp.156-159. 
Das.B.M.(1984). “Meyerhof’s Bearing Capacity Theory”, Principles of Geotechnical Engineering, 
Vol.4, pp.536-539. 
Das B. M.  (1984) “Mat Foundation”, Principles of Foundation Engineering, Vol.4, pp.293-296. 
Amolo Noah, Asura (2008).Introduction to Visual Basic Programming. 
Nilson Arthur H., Darwin David, Dolan Charles W. (1923).  “Design Procedure of Single Column 
Footing”, Design of Concrete Structures, Vol. 13. pp. 551-559. 
Punmia B. C., Jain Ashok Kumar, Jain Arun Kumar (1970) “Assumptions and Limitations of 
Terzaghi’s Bearing Capacity Theory”, Soil Mechanics and Foundations, Vol.13, pp.668-669. 
Punmia B. C., Jain Ashok Kumar, Jain Arun Kumar (1970). “Shallow Foundations”, Soil Mechanics 
and Foundations, Vol.13,pp.727-729. 
Pricto-Portar L. (2008). “Combined Footing”, Journal of the Geotechnical Engineering Division, 
American Society of Civil Engineers, pp. 1257-1276. 
718 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
WATER SUPPLY VERSUS DEMAND IN KUET CAMPUS 
 
 
Mousumy Akter1, Khondokar Mahbub Hassan2 and Dr. Quazi Hamidul Bari3 
 
 
ABSTRACT: Potable water treatment is one of the most challenging and complex systems 
that require dealing with water supply versus water demand. This study presents the 
development of water quantity of the water treatment plant (WTP) to reach the demand 
of water. A WTP was established at KUET campus in 2000 keeping in mind the existing 
population of that time. But modification is needed for increased population of this 
campus. The total demand of water is calculated and it is compared with the total supply 
of water. It was estimated that the treated water quantity would be sufficient to meet up 
the total demand in KUET campus. In this case, loss of water from the supply pipe 
network and misuse of water at the consumers tap should be minimized. Furthermore, the 
rainwater harvesting would significantly supplement the increased demand of water in 
KUET campus. The nearby Bhairab river water quality was found to be highly saline in 
dry season and thus seemed difficult as a source for the WTP. To minimize the salinity 
problem, a proper blending of ground water and surface water ratio is needed. A 
calculation of roof water is done in this study and blending ratios is checked.   
 
Keyword: water supply, water demand, alternative source, Yield of treated water in WTP 
rainwater harvesting. 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Growing water scarcity threatens economic development, sustainable human livelihoods, 
environmental quality, and a host of other societal goals in countries and regions around the 
world. Unfortunately; more than one in six people still lack reliable access to this precious 
resource in developing country like Bangladesh (CPCB 2011). Urban population growth, 
particularly in developing countries, places immense pressure on water and land resources; it also 
results in the release of growing volumes of wastewater – most of it untreated (Omran 2011). 
Also, most of the earth water is sea water. About 2.5% of the water is fresh water that does not 
contain significant levels of dissolved minerals or salt and two third of that is frozen in ice caps 
and glaciers. In total only 0.01% of the total water of the planet is accessible for consumption. 
                                                        
1Department of Civil Engineering, Khulna University of Engineering & Technology (KUET), Khulna-9203, 
Bangladesh. akter.mousumy@yahoo.com  
2Associate Professor, Department of Civil Engineering, KUET, Khulna-9203, Bangladesh. khmhassan@ya
hoo.com 
3Professor, Department of Civil Engineering, KUET, Khulna-9203, Bangladesh. qhbari@yahoo.com 
719 
 
The future economic, social, and environmental costs of meeting the water needs of human 
populations and supporting economic development will depend on our ability to understand and 
manage water demands. Water demand management, a relatively new branch of water resources 
science, offers a promising alternative for sustaining the world’s freshwater supplies in the next 
century and beyond. Past research and experience indicate that appropriate water-demand 
management policies can improve the existing supply-demand balance in water-stressed regions 
(Dziegielewski 2003). 
   In coastal areas of Bangladesh the crucial situation in water supply due to excessive salinity, 
has made it very hard for people to get access to safe and sweet drinking water. From this point of 
view, in KUET Khulna, a WTP is established for supply good quality of water assuring healthful 
life for its inhabitants (Akter et al., 2008). However, blending of surface water, ground water, and 
rainwater from available sources with low cost treatment process would have promising 
application for such areas. Considerable volumes will have to be mined from nonrenewable 
ground-water reserves (Razzak    1995) and excess use of surface water is harmful for 
environment (CPCB 2011). There are six student hall, offices and residential building for teachers, 
officers and employees in this campus. So, water for drinking and domestics work is needed. 
Water for drinking and food preparation must be free from pathogenic micro-organisms, 
minerals and organic substances having affected on human health. Besides this, water 
must be aesthetically acceptable. For example, it should be free from turbidity, apparent color, 
any objectionable tests and salinity. In drinking water, presence of turbidity and apparent color 
cause psychological impact on consumers. High saline water is unfit for drinking. Furthermore, 
campus population is increasing day by day and the water supply should be modified according 
to the demand of KUET campus. A future forecasting should be estimated and alternative sources 
of raw water can be added with existing sources. Rainwater harvesting, a promising source of raw 
water is very significantly calculated in this study. The factors of ideal raw water sources (Zaman 
et al 2009) should be also takes into account.  
   The objective of this study is to investigate the water demand versus water supply and based 
on this study to propose guidelines for the sustainable development of the WTP at KUET campus 
in terms of both quality and quantity of the treated water. 
   The efficiency of raw water quality is calculated. The system process is observed for a several 
time is given below:  
                                     
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Figure 1 Flow diagram of the water treatment plan at KUET campus 
 
P=Pond, SSF=Slow Sand Filter, C= Clear Water Reservoir 
P(cr) 
P(B) 
P (c) 
CuSO4 
Alum 
Flocculation 
+ 
Sediment 
CL2
Roughing 
filter 
SSF SSF SSF SSF C 
CL2 
720 
 
2. Methodology 
 
Preliminary field inspection was made in KUET campus to investigate the WTP. The discussion 
was made about problems associated with supplied water with consumers. From the questioners 
survey in KUET campus it was come forward that the water supply is not sufficient as per 
population demand. For this reason, the amount of water demand and water supply was made to 
focus the main idea of this study.  
   The calculation of water requirement was done very carefully. At first the total number of 
building and apartment was estimated from a list given by engineering section at KUET campus. 
Then it was multiplied by five member of each apartment to estimate the population in teachers' 
building. The total number of residential student was calculated from the border list given from 
each Hall. The total daily consumption of water for residential buildings was taken 180 L/day 
(Ahmed et al., 2000). People who work during daytime were estimated from the list of employee 
given by engineering section. The daily consumption of water for the people work     during 
daytime was taken as 60 L/day (Ahmed et al., 2000). By adding the demand of   residential 
population and people, work during daytime, total demand of water is calculated. 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                 
Figure 2 WTP at KUET campus 
 
   Yield of treated water (AWWA 2005) was calculated to estimate the total supply capacity of 
treated water. The time taken to release 30 liter from each sources was calculated. Then it was 
multiplied by the total time of pumping of each source. Adding the total source water, the yield of 
treated water was determined. By comparing the total demand of water and yield of water it was 
clear that WTP is sufficient to supply the demand water because it was a continuous process and 
the overhead reservoir was also sufficient to reserve the each days demand water for KUET 
campus. But for the misuse of water, bad habit of consumers, the leakages of pipe line may affect 
the crisis of demand water.                
   Though the demand can be met up by the supply water but a trial of alternative source was 
done for increased population of KUET campus. The increasing of student made concern to build 
students halls, teacher’s dormitory, teacher’s residents, classrooms, day time employee in KUET 
campus and the water demand is increasing. No further modification was done after its 
establishment, so a revised calculation is necessary for ensuring the water supply according to 
721 
 
water demand. Alternative sources of raw water are also important because the blending of 
surface water can be a solution of salinity problems. So, Bhairab river water was collected and 
tested (AWWA 2005) in laboratory but the chloride contamination was much in dry season that’s 
why it cannot be a raw water source of this WTP.  
   The rainwater harvesting can be a solution of quantity of water and the blending ratios of 
surface water and ground water. For this project of rainwater harvesting, the total area of roof 
was calculated. Then it was multiplied by the average rainfall of Khulna city from last 50 years. 
The average rainfall of Khulna city was collected from weather office of Khulna city. No design 
of reservoir was done because the pond can be used as reservoir. It is an economic project 
because no extra pump (Peavy et al., 1995) is used in this project to run the rain water. The rain 
water can be run to the pond by gravitational force only. The expected rainwater was calculated.  
   Then the blending ratios of deep tubewel water, pond water and rainwater is calculated where 
the use of surface water is under acceptable limit (30 to 35%). In this calculation, the rainwater 
was fully used where the pond water was used after using the deep tubewel water for a good 
result. By maintaining these blending ratios, the salinity of water may be in acceptable limit with 
no harmful impact on environment for using extra surface water. 
 
 
3. Results & Discussion 
 
3.1 Estimation of Water Requirement at KUET campus 
 
Now, there are six students hall in KUET campus and another one is going to be built, but it 
cannot enough space for all students of this campus. For this purpose, keeping mind of this non-
residential student the students were not calculated as whole rather than only residential students 
of each hall. But it should be taken concern that for increasing of students the teachers, staff and 
other employee will increase and it is a responsibility to serve treated water for all.  
 
3.1.1 Population estimation 
The demand of water is not same for residential population at KUET campus and the people 
works only in day time at KUET campus. The residential populations are the main consumer of 
water so it was calculated very carefully. 
 
Table 1 Residential population 
 
Residential building  Population 
Total population in teachers building 
Total population lives in dormitory  
Student residential-Rokeya Hall 
Student residential-Khan Jahan Ali Hall 
Student residential-Amar Ekushe Hall 
Student residential-M.A. Rashid Hall 
Student residential-Lalan Shah Hall 
Student residential- Fazlul Haque Hall 
Total  
550 
50 
200 
180 
575 
180 
180 
90 
2005 
 
722 
 
Table 2 Population available only in day time 
 
Department No. of employee 
Administration building 60 
CE 50 
EEE 40 
CSE 40 
ECE 40 
IEM 40 
Engg. Section 
Total  
30 
300 
 
CE=Civil Engineering, EEE=Electrical & Electronics Engineering, CSE=Computer Science & 
Engineering, ECE=Electronics & Communication Engineering, IEM=Industrial & Management 
Engineering  
 
3.1.2 Water demand calculation 
Water demand at KUET campus was calculated by following: 
Water used per day by residential people=2005*180=360900 litre/day 
Water used per day by only day time living people=300*60=18000 litre/day 
Total water need per day=378900 litre/day=100238 galon 
This amount of water is the demand of present situation, but it is increasing for the increasing 
population of KUET campus. 
 
3.2 Yield of treated water in WTP  
 
The yield of water was done manually; a bucket of 30 litre was taken to measure the time spend 
to release the water. Then the amount of water was measured by calculation if the pump work 
four hours in a day.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3 Pipeline of various sources having different diameter 
723 
 
There are two types of pipe diameter in this system; one is 2inch diameter used for pond and deep 
tubewel and another one is 1.5inch diameter for tubewel. The difference of water falling rate by 
same pipe diameter from different sources is responsible for height loss, distance and horsepower 
of pump. For this reasons, every pipeline was checked for this calculation. From the chart of 
WTP pump system it was estimated that each pump was worked 4 hours daily safely.   
 
Table 3 Calculation of yield of treated water 
 
Pipe dia 
 
Name of the 
source 
Time taken to 
release 30 L 
(sec) 
If the source work 4hr in a day 
then the amount of treated water 
 
 
2 inch 
P1 
P2 
DTW1 
DTW2 
7.95 
7.92 
7.88 
7.83 
58670 litre/day 
57540 litre/day 
55385 Litre/day 
54545 Litre/day 
 
 
1.5 inch 
 
 
 
T1 
T4 
T5 
T6 
T8 
T9 
T10 
T12 
33.46 
32.88 
33.98 
33.16 
32.91 
31.78 
33.16 
32.61 
12911 litre/day 
13139 litre/day 
12713 litre/day 
13028 litre/day 
13126 litre/day 
13593 litre/day 
13027 litre/day 
13247 litre/day 
 
P1= Pond 1, P2=pond 2, P3=Pond 3, DTW1=Deep tubewel, DTW2=Deep tubewel, T1=Tubewel 
1, T4= Tubewel 4, T5= Tubewel 5, T6= Tubewel 6, T8= Tubewel 8, T9= Tubewel 9, T10= 
Tubewel 10, T12= Tubewel 12. 
 
In June water treated= 86437gal/day 
In July water treated=90140gal/day 
But now water is not supplied to the students of residential hall. The daily used water per day in 
present- 
Teachers building and dormitory=550+50=600peple  
Day time living people=300 
Used water=600*180+300*60=126000litre/day=33333galon/day 
 
 So a huge amount of water is lost by misuse and pipe line lick age. By changing the bad 
habit and old age pipe system a huge amount of the water can be saved. 
 
 In this project it was observed that the shallow tubewels’ water is very saline and 
maximum tubewel are suffering by layer failure problems. But if tubewels are eliminate 
as a source, cause of salinity & layer failure and tried to supply students hall alternative 
source is needed. 
 
 
 
724 
 
3.3 Alternative sources of water  
Searching of alternative sources is necessary of course for water quantity and quality also. To 
serve the whole campus alternative source is a significant element. But unfortunately, students 
hall are now out of these activities. To use the campus property it can be ensured. Keeping mind 
the salinity problem surface water should be used, but there is an unused pond in KUET campus 
which can be used by some modification. Another source can be the river water which is 
available, and the water was tested in this project. The most common alternatives way of water 
sources used all over the world in coastal area is the rainwater harvesting. Solar system, 
ultraviolet ray use for getting purified water was not concerned in this study because of economic 
project. Using of bending of surface water, deep tubewel water and rainwater instead of salinity 
removing technology was only for availability and economic reasons.      
   The treated water samples were collected and the water quality parameters were analyzed in 
the laboratory. A seasonal variation was noticed for the analyzed water quality and the 
performance of WTP was found fluctuating with some parameters beyond the acceptable limit of 
Bangladesh standard for drinking water. Specially, the chloride (Cl-) concentration was noticed to 
be varied in the range of 436~889 mg/l, even in the same day. However, this problem could be 
eliminated with minor modifications with regards to operation and maintenance in the WTP. To 
maintain the chloride concentration within the acceptable limit, the shallow tubewel water 
sources should be eliminated by alternative sources. 
 
3.3.1 Bhairab river 
For the proposals of eliminating tubewel water as a source of raw water another sources like 
Bhairab river and roof water was tried to add as a source in this thesis project. But for chloride 
contamination the source of Bhairab River is ignored and the roof water is added. 
   The nearest river Bhairab is situated approximately 2-3 km from the campus and will be a 
difficult task for the transmission of river water from such a distance. Because the approach road 
towards the river is very narrow and a rail line and national highway should be crossed. Moreover, 
it has been reported that the water quality is deteriorating day by day due increase of salinity and 
disposal of untreated waste from the adjacent industries. Construction of an Intake, De-silting 
basin and pump house at the river site might be potable in them of availability of land, cost and 
operational management. 
               
Table 4 River water test result with necessary parameters 
 
Source Chloride 
 
(mg/l) 
Hardn
ess 
(mg/l) 
Color 
 
(PtCo) 
Turbidity 
 
(NTU) 
TDS 
 
(mg/l) 
TC 
 
(N/100ml) 
FC 
 
(N/100ml) 
pH 
Bhairob 1235 80 382 63.4 2400 800 34 7.99 
 
 This source cannot be considered as a potential source of water because the parameters 
are not in acceptable limit (WHO 1985). The main problem of this surface water is the 
chloride concentration in summer seasons. If the water mix up with other sources the 
TDS, turbidity, color may come in acceptable limit but chloride concentration will 
exceed the tolerable limit even in coastal zoon (600mg/l).But the deep tubewel water is 
less saline than the Bhairab river water.    
725 
 
3.3.2 Rain water harvesting 
So, a next trial was applied on rainwater harvesting in roof for chlorine free demand. There are 
three big ponds existing in the campus, which can be used as water reservoir. It is usually 
assumed that 25% of rain water is lost due to evaporation and other losses. Location of adjacent 
water table and seasonal fluctuation will also affect the water level in these ponds. However, use 
of pond water should be within certain limit (30-35%) to avoid any possible negative impact on 
the environment and on the aquatic lives of the water body. 
   Rain water is available in adequate quantities in Bangladesh. In the coastal areas, with a 
greater fresh water source problem, rainfall is higher, which is favorable for rain water harvesting. 
The average yearly rainfall in the country during 1987-96 varied from 1950 to 2800 mm, i.e. 1.95 
to 2.80 m3 of rain water was available per m2 of catchment area each year for development of 
rainwater based water supply system. However, there are some losses like evaporation losses 
occur in collection system. Rain water collection in Bangladesh has been practiced for a long 
time on a limited scale. There are two main constructions in development of a completely 
rainwater based water supply system: I) availability of suitable catchment area and ii) the need 
for largest storage tank. Both of this condition is satisfied in KUET campus. 
   The pipeline for this rainwater harvesting project is economic with respect to its purpose. The 
roof water can pass through the pipeline in ground by a straight pipe. But in ground it should be 
designed such a way that the water can pass through the whole pipe without any pump rather than 
gravitational forces. For this reason, the pipeline should be inclined and destination should be 
near pond from respective buildings.  
 
Table 5 Rainwater calculation of roof water in rainy season 
 
Building name Area 
 
 
 
 
(m2) 
Annual 
avg. 
rainfall 
in 
Khulna 
(m) 
Quantity of 
rainwater  
from 
building 
roof 
 (m3) 
B1,B2,B3,B4,B5,B6,B7,B8,B9,B10, B11,B12,B13,B14, B15, 
B16,B17, B18, DORMATORY, TEACHERS CLUB, STUF 
CLUB 
 
 
5723 
 
 
9821 
 
ADMINISTRATION,EEE,CE,ME,SC,CL,CSE,ECE, 
EIM, WORK SHOP, CCC, HIT  ENGIN, SCHOOLS 
 
 
11720 
 
 
20111 
 
ROKEYA HALL, RASHID HALL, FAJLUL HAQ HALL, 
KHAJA HALL, LALAN HALL, EKHUSEY  HALL 
 
 
9080 
 
 
15581 
 
TOTAL 26523 
 
 
 
1.716 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.716 45513 
 
Total roof area: 26523sq m 
Avg. rainfall of last 50 years: 1.716 m 
Quantity of water: 45513m3 
30% evaporation loss= 13654m3 
726 
 
Water can be used: 31859m3= 31859000l= 8428333gal 
Total annual demand of water= 30734825gal 
 It means only rain water can perform to supply 23% of water demand. 
 
3.4 Blending ratios check  
 
From the above calculation, a blending ratio revision is necessary to supply the increased demand 
of water. Another reason for the revision of blending ratios is to ensure sufficient, but not more 
than source, capacity of water. A blending ratio can supply demand water without causing any 
environmental impact. Proper proportioning of surface water, deep tubewel water can ensure an 
acceptable limit of salinity (600 mg/l) (WHO 1984) without environment impact. 
 
Table 6 Blending ratios of different sources 
 
Source raw water 
 
Pond 
 
Deep tubewel 
 
Rain water 
 
% 35 42 23 
 
 
 Every house should have pump to maintain the tank. 
 Every tank should clean and chlorination regularly for avoids TC contamination. 
 
 
4. Conclusions 
 
The major findings of this study are outlined as below: 
 The yield of treated water is sufficient at this moment to supply the existing population. 
However, elimination of saline shallow tubewel water sources as well as new water 
supply connections to students’ hall needs alternative sources.  
 Bhairab river water is not suggested because of long distance and salinity problems. 
 Rain water harvesting was found to be a highly promising option for KUET campus. 
 New reservoir is not needed to be excavated but the existing ponds can be effectively 
used to store the rainwater with minor amendment. 
 Rain water collection from the existing building roofs is simple and economic. The 
water can flow through the pipelines under gravity force alone, no need of pumps. 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
At first, the authors express gratitude to the almighty Allah that the project has been 
accomplished perfectly and successfully at fixed time. The authors like to express thanks to Mr. 
Sardar Saidul Alam, Lab Assistant and Mr. Sayed Ahsan Ali, Assistant Technician officer of 
Environmental Engineering Laboratory, Department of Civil Engineering, KUET. The authors 
are thankful to the Engineering Section of KUET for giving necessary information and data when 
needed. Mr. Kartiq and all employees of WTP at KUET campus were helpful to fulfill this project. 
 
 
727 
 
References 
 
Ahmed M.F and Rahman M.M (2000) “Water supply and sanitation”, Rural and low income 
urban communication, ITN Bangladesh, Center for water supply and waste management, Ch-
18, Pp (347-349). 
Akter T. and Jahan I, (2008) Monitoring of water quality parameters of KUET WTP and 
household filter, B.Sc. Engg thesis report, Department of Civil Engineering, KUET, Khulna. 
APHA, AWWA, WEF. (2005) Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, 
21st edn. American Public Health Association (APHA), American Water Works Association 
(AWWA), and Water Environment Federation (WEF), USA. 
“Consultancy sevices of design & supervision of water treatment plant for BIT, Khulna(CSDS)”. 
(October 2000), A Design and Construction Manual, Engg section, KUET. 
Dziegielewski, Benedykt (2003) "Strategies for Managing Water Demand," Journal of 
Contemporary Water Research and Education: Vol. 126: Iss. 1, Article 5 
IRC (1981), Slow Sand Filtration for Community Water Supply- A Design and Construction 
Manual. Technical Paper Series No. 11. JC. Vandijk and H.C.M Oomen, aus. The Hague, 
Netherlands. 
Omran A. (2011) Factors Influencing Water Treatment Management Performance in Malasiya: A 
case study in PULAU PINANG, annals of faculty engineering Huneduara, International 
journal of engineering, Tome ix, Fascicule 1, (ISSN 1584-2665). 
Peavey H. S.; Rowe D. R and Tchbanoglous G. (1995). “Environmental Engineering” 
International Eddition, McGrew- Hill Company, Singapore, Ch-4, pp.191-197.  
Zaman, M. R. And Rahman M.M (2009) performance analysis of KUET water treatment plant, 
B.Sc. Engg thesis report, Department of Civil Engineering, KUET, Khulna. 
“Status of water treatment plant in India (SWTPI)”, (2011), (Central pollution control board), 
Ministry of environment and forests, India. 
http://cpcb.nic.in/upload/NewItems/NewItem_103_statusofwaterqualitypackage.pdf, 
(Accessed on 28/04/2011).   
Wegelin M. (1916) Surface Water Treatment by Roughing Filter –A design Construction and 
Operation Manual, SANDEC REPORT No.02/96. 
WHO (1984),” Guidelines for drinking water quality”. World Health Organization, Volume 1 and 
3. 
 
 
 
 
728 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
IMPROVEMENT OF SUBGRADE USING JUTE GEOTEXTILE (JGT) 
 
 
Dr.Md.Mizanur Rahman1 and Abdur Rahim2  
 
 
ABSTRACT: To investigate the use of Jute geotextile (JGT) as a way of improving the strength 
of subgrade is the main purpose of the study. The study was conducted in order to compare 
between the CBR value of the subgrade soil sample with Jute geotextile to without Jute geotextile 
and hence find out the CBR increase ratio at same compaction effort. Subgrade is an in situ 
material upon which the pavement structure is placed. It can be composed of a wide range of 
materials although some are much better than others. Geotextile is a fabric interlayer placed 
between the subgrade and above pavement structure (the subgrade is usually untreated).Jute 
geotextile is a kind of geotextile which is cheaper and eco- friendly than the synthetic one. It is 
also known as soil saver. Jute geotextile is one of the most important diversified jute products 
with a potentially large scale application. It can have several applications as: soil erosion control, 
vegetation consolidation, agro- mulching, reinforcement, and protection of riverbanks & 
embankments, land reclamation and in road pavement construction. In the purpose of increasing 
bearing ratio by using Jute geotextile is completely new phenomenon in Bangladesh, noticeable 
work had not been conducted except a portion of an arterial road constructed in front of 
Birshreshtho Shahid Jahangir Gate(3rd Gate) of Dhaka Cantonment. Soil samples were collected 
from that site and a series of CBR tests were conducted on that sample with the inclusion of Jute 
geotextile and without Jute geotextile, following the standard CBR test procedure. By the 
analysis of the data obtained from those tests we are able to conclude that the CBR value of the 
soil with Jute geotextile is always found to be higher than that of without Jute geotextile at all 
corresponding dry densities. The CBR increase ratio is 1.52 times at 94.3% of maximum dry 
density. 
 
1. Introduction 
 
The “subgrade” is the in-situ material upon which the pavement structure is placed. Although 
there is a tendency to look at pavement performance in terms of pavement structure and mix 
design alone, the subgrade can often be the overriding factor in measuring pavement performance. 
Poor subgrade should be avoided if possible but when it is necessary to build over weak soils 
there are several methods used to improve subgrade. One of the methods of improving subgrade 
is installation of an additional layer above the subgrade which increase the strength of subgrade. 
Jute geo textile (JGT) is a modern material in transportation engineering which can be used as an 
additional layer. Subgrade materials are typically characterized by their resistance to deformation 
                                                        
1Associate Professor, Department of Civil Engineering, Bangladesh University of  Engineering and 
Technology (BUET), Dhaka, Bangladesh. mizanur@ce.buet.ac.bd  
2Junior Engineer, Institute of Water Modelling, Dhaka, Bangladesh, sam_ce_rh@yahoo.com 
 
 
729 
 
under load, in other words their stiffness or their bearing capacity. There are three basic subgrade 
stiffness/ strength characterizations commonly used: a) California bearing ratio-CBR, b) 
Resistance value-R c) Resilient modulus-MR. Inspection of the quality of subgrade is very 
important , because once a road is built then there lies no chance of replacing the subgrade, 
whereas there would be a provision of replacing the surface course as well as the base course. If 
subgrade fails then no cure can be proposed but let the roads go useless. Performance of the 
subgrade generally depends on three of its basic characteristics, all of which are interrelated. 
   i) Load bearing capacity: The subgrade must be able to support loads transmitted from 
pavement structure. This load bearing capacity is often affected by degree of compaction, 
moisture content and soil type. A subgrade that can support a high amount of loading within 
permissive deformation is considered as good. 
   ii) Moisture content: Moisture tends to affect a number of subgrade properties including load 
bearing capacity, shrinkage and swelling. Moisture content can be influenced by a number of 
parameters such as drainage, ground water table elevation, infiltration or pavement porosity. 
Generally wet subgrade will deform excessively under loading condition. 
   iii) Shrinkage and/or swelling: Some soils shrink or swell depending upon their moisture 
content. Shrinkage, swelling or frost heave will tend to deform and crack to any pavement type 
constructed over the poor subgrade. 
 
1.1. Methods used to improve subgrade performance 
 
1.1.1. Removal and replacement 
Poor subgrade soil can simply be removed and replaced with higher quality fill. Although this is 
simple in concept but tough in practical. 
 
1.1.2. Stabilization with a cementitious or asphaltic binder 
The addition of an appropriate binder such as lime, Portland cement emulsified asphalt can 
increase subgrade strength.  
 
1.1.3 Additional base layers 
Marginally poor subgrade soils may be made acceptable by using additional base layers. These 
layers spread pavement loads over large subgrade area. This option is rather perilious, when 
designing pavements for poor subgrades the temptation may be to just design a thicker section 
with more base material because the thicker section will satisfy most design equations. In short , 
a thick pavement structure over a poor subgrade may not make a good pavement.   
 
1.1.4 Use of geotextile 
Synthetic geotextiles and geogrids have been successfully used as road subgrade reinforcement in 
order to increase the load carrying capacity of the reinforced soil subgrade system and thereby to 
reduce the total thickness of the pavement. Design methods and charts for this purpose have been 
proposed by many researchers (Koerner, 1998). The method of reinforcing subgrades with 
geotextiles is found to be more effective on weaker subgrades where geotextile is likely to 
deform enough to mobilize its full tensile strength and thereby increase the load carrying capacity 
of the reinforced subgrade to its full extent.  
 
1.1.5. Jute geotextile 
Jute geotextile is one of the most important diversified jute products with a potentially large scale 
 
 
730 
 
applications. It can have several applications as soil erosion control, vegetation consolidation, 
agro-mulching, reinforcement, and protection of river banks and embankments, land reclamation 
and in road pavement constructions. Till now, a few research works have been conducted in the 
laboratory in order to assess the effectiveness of JGT for the same purpose (Khan, 2008). In this 
study, an endeavour has been made to check the feasibility of using JGTs as reinforcement in 
stead of synthetic geotextiles through laboratory tests and apply it in the field to evaluate the 
performance. 
 
2. Background of the study 
 
Jute has been cultivated in the Bengal Delta from time immemorial. Today, the production of jute 
is an enormous industry with current production capacity of around 3 million tonnes per annum. 
Of this, about 40% is produced in Bangladesh, about 58% in India and the reminder in China and 
Thailand. The main uses of jute in Bangladesh are still in the manufacturing of sacking, hessians, 
carpet etc. 
   By the turn of the century, synthetic fibres, better known as ‘nylon’ and ‘terylene’ appeared in 
the market and displaced natural fibres significantly. The birth of modern synthetic geotextile 
usage in civil engineering was in the early 1960s, In almost every geotextile application, great 
emphasis is placed on ensuring that the geotextile has a long life. In the case of some soil 
reinforcement applications, geotextiles is required to function for more than 120 years (BS 8006, 
1995). Interestingly, not all geotechnical applications demand a long design life of geotextiles. 
For example, in case of raindrop erosion control, the purpose of geotextile is to prevent rain-
splash erosion of soil until the vegetation can become properly established on the ground surface. 
Once the surface vegetation is grown, it then takes over the erosion control function, making the 
presence of the geotextile superfluous/redundant (John, 1987). At this stage, it is usually 
advantageous for the geotextile to decompose. Therefore, jute materials can be very effectively 
used in this case to serve the purpose as it has the advantage of being eco-compatible and cost-
competitive (GoI, 2008). 
   Again, the inherent weakness of jute material is that, due to its hydrophilic characteristics, 
untreated jute cannot be used in saturated environment for more than 6 to 9 months. Therefore, 
engineers were indecisive in using jute in civil engineering purposes. However, Abdullah (1999) 
have shown through accelerated testing that with different methods of treatment, biodegradability 
of jute products may be enhanced from 5 years to up to 20 years. This step forward innovation 
allowed jute products to be termed as jute geotextiles (JGT) and opened up avenues for these to 
be applied in many civil engineering applications, e.g.filtration, separation and soil reinforcement 
(Prodhan, 2001). Moreover, Mohy (2005) has determined few engineering properties of jute 
which could be exploited to use JGT as a replacement of synthetic geotextiles at places. One of 
the sectors of application could be reinforcement of subgrade soil for flexible pavement 
construction.  In India, JGTs have been used for pavement construction with the primary focus 
on filtration, separation and subgrade reinforcement (GoI, 2006). However, no specific design 
guideline is currently available for reinforcing the subgrade soil using JGT that commensurate 
with the pavement design practice in Bangladesh.  
   Unfortunately, Bangladesh being a major producer, jute was not given due importance in civil 
engineering except for such purposes as sandbags and for concrete curing protection. The 
identification and application of jute materials in civil engineering will open up new horizon for 
this ‘golden fibre’ to be sustained and protect the interest of millions of farmers, mill labourers 
and others who are directly or indirectly involved with jute in Bangladesh. 
 
 
731 
 
3. Methodology 
 
This test method covers the determination of CBR (California Bearing Ratio) of selected soil 
sample as subgrade material, it also covers  the determination of CBR of that particular material 
at optimum water content or a range of water content from a specified compaction test. 
 
3.1. Selection of site for study 
  
The study undertaken was a part of Airport Road – Rokeya Sharoni Link Road Project, funded by 
Dhaka City Corporation and executed by 16 Engineer Construction Battalion of the Corps of 
Engineers of Bangladesh Army. The site was located along the Airport Road and 50 m south of 
Birsreshtho Shahid Jahangir Gate (3rd Gate) of Dhaka Cantonment and 200 m north of Public 
Service Commission. The aerial view of the work site is shown in Figure1. The work site had a 
trapezoidal shape with a length of 71.3 m or 234 ft and a variable width ranging from 6.4 m to 2.1 
m (21 ft to 7 ft). Total work area was 304 sq-m (3273 sq-ft). The aim of the work was to widen 
the existing road for creating an extra lane for the vehicles entering cantonment. The lane is to be 
used by one-way traffic.  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                    Figure 1 Aerial view of the site work 
 
3.2. Selection of materials for the study 
 
Materials including soil of the selected site, DW Twill type JGT etc were collected for laboratory 
investigation. Disturbed and undisturbed both types of soil were collected from the site since the 
sensitivity of soil is very important factor over its inherent property.  
  
Jahangir Gate Work 
23046′25.98′′ N and 90023′27.75′′ E 
 
 
732 
 
3.3. Soil 
 
3.3.1. Collection of soil 
Standard Penetration Test (SPT) was conducted at three points along the work site at a distance of 
approximately 35 m to get the sub-soil profile on November 23, 2008. Both disturbed and 
undisturbed samples were collected up to a depth of 10.5 m for subsequent investigations. The 
profiles were more or less same for all three spots. The sub-soil profile indicates that at Jahangir 
Gate up to first 5 – 5.5 m depth the soil is reddish brown stiff silty clay with trace of girt and fine 
sand. This layer is highly plastic. The SPT (N) value ranges within 9 – 12 in this layer. In the next 
1.5 to 2 m, the soil is brown stiff clayey silt with fine sand. The SPT (N) value ranges within 7 – 
8 in this layer. In the last 3.5 m, the soil is brown and medium dense silty fine sand with trace of 
mica. The field SPT( N) value ranges within 12 - 26 in this layer. In general, the soil condition as 
subgrade was quite good for road construction..  
 
3.4. Jute geotextile (JGT) 
 
3.4.1.Selection basis of 15 years design life for JGT 
In this study, the designed biodegradability of the JGT is selected up to 15 years because of the 
following reasonable assumptions. Over a period of 15 years the original subgrade soil will be 
capable of taking the wheel load stress due to: increase of thickness of road surface due to 
maintenance. This will reduce stress on the subgrade and the subgrade soil itself will gain shear 
strength (i.e. CBR value will increase) due to consolidation and therefore will be capable of 
carrying more load compared to its original condition. 
 
3.5. Treatment of JGT  
 
The inherent weakness of jute material is that, due to its hydrophilic characteristics, untreated jute 
can not be used in saturated environment for more than 6 months to 9 months. However, 
Abdullah (1999) have shown through accelerated testing that with different methods of treatment, 
biodegradability of jute products may be enhanced from 5 years to up to 20 years. This step 
forward innovation allowed jute products to be termed as JGT and opened up avenues for these to 
be applied in many civil engineering applications, e.g. filtration, separation and soil 
reinforcement (Prodhan, 2001). The type of jute material used for this study is Double Wrap 
(DW) Twill, a typical production of Bangladesh Jute Mills Corporation (BJMC). The salient 
index properties of the DW Twill samples are presented in Table 1.The treatment of JGT was 
done by ‘Arcadia Property Development Limited’ through a pilot scale production.  It was 
treated under patent no. 1002688 (Government of Bangladesh). Copper composition, bitumen, 
silicate etc were used for the treatment. Designed biodegradability of the JGT was 15 years. 
Figure 2 shows the JGT sample after treatment. 
 
     Table 1 Salient Index Properties of the JGT Samples (after BJMC Handout, 2003) 
 
Trade Name Source Condition Commercial Characteristics 
Width –
Length(inch) 
Wt/pack DW 
(Double 
Warp) Twill 
BJMC Untreated 
19-43 2.782 lbs 
 
 
733 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Figure 2 JGT sample after treatment 
                                              
3.6. Soil – JGT System 
 
A series of CBR tests were performed on clay soil with and without JGT at the Geotechnical 
Laboratory of Department of Civil Engineering, Bangladesh University of Engineering and 
Technology in order to study the effect of JGT on CBR values. No specific standard laboratory 
setup for evaluating the effect on CBR for fibre type reinforcing material in soil is currently 
available. However, guideline suggested by ASTM D 1883-87 was followed for this purpose. The 
soil was compacted in 3 layers with different compaction energy. During the preparation of CBR 
mould with JGT, a JGT sample of the same diameter of the mould was cut and placed over the 
first compacted layer from the bottom. A schematic presentation of the arrangement for CBR test 
without and with is shown in Figure 3. Then the mould was soaked for 96 hours before 
determination of CBR value. It may be appreciated that the CBR tests were conducted for soil 
sample collected from the wok site with and without JGT samples at different dry densities using 
different compaction energy. Different dry densities were achieved by dropping 10 pounds 
hammer from a height of 18 inches with 5, 15, 25, 35 and 56 blows. In each case, 3 consistent 
results were counted and averaging of the results was done from there. 
   
    
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
             
Figure 3 Arrangement for CBR test without and with JGT 
 
 
Magnified
Layer-3 
 
 
Layer-2 
 
Layer-1 
 
Layer-3 
 
Layer-2 
 
Layer-1 
 
Penetration  rod 
JGT 
 
 
734 
 
4. Data Analysis and Test Results 
 
The present study is conducted to compare the CBR value of soil specimen having JGT to 
without JGT at same compaction effort. Our specimens were compacted at three layers. The 
analysis were made to find out the economic efficiency of using jute geotextile (JGT) as 
reinforcing material above the subgrade. 
 
4.1. Methods of analysis 
 
The formula used to find out the CBR value is 
CBR= {test load/standard load}*100 
The following table gives the standard value of loads adopted for different penetrations for the 
standard material with a CBR value of 100% had been used. 
 
                Table 2 Standard load for different penetration of plunger 
 
Penetration of plunger (mm) Standard load (kg) 
2.5 
5.0 
1370 
2055 
 
By using the above two standard value the maximum value of CBR was taken. 
 
4.2. Test results 
 
While collating the test data, it was interesting to note that there is an increase in CBR value or 
load bearing capacity of the soil when JGT is being used. Load applied through plunger and 
corresponding penetration in soil at different dry densities with and without JGT are shown in 
Figures 4, 5, and 6.  
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
     
           
 
      
     
 
                                        
                      Figure 4 Load vs. Penetration curve for 25 blow 
                                              
 
Avg. dry density = 16.6 kN/m3 
Avg. water content = 19.8% 
Avg. CBR w.o. JGT = 2.9% 
Avg. CBR with JGT = 4.4% 
 
 
735 
 
 
 
 
                                 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                        
                                        Fig. 2 Load vs  
                           
                       Figure5 load vs. Penetration curve for 35 blow 
                          
                      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                   
                                    
                       Figure 6 load vs. Penetration curve for 56 blow 
                                       
The CBR value of the soil with JGT is always higher than that of without JGT at all 
corresponding dry densities. The average CBR values at different dry densities are shown in 
Figure 4. The CBR increase ratio at different dry densities determined from the ratio of CBR with 
JGT and CBR without JGT shows that the increase of CBR is less initially, but it accelerates 
gradually and reaches highest at 94.3% of maximum dry density (obtained by 25 blows). There 
after there is decline of this increase. As a result, JGT has very less impact on soils with higher 
CBR value. The CBR increase ratio at different dry densities is shown in Figure 5. The CBR 
increase ratio is 1.52 times at 94.3% of maximum dry density. At ground condition, soil can be 
compacted to 94-95% of maximum dry density safely.  Hence, 1.5 times increase of CBR value 
with the application of JGT is catered for the design of this particular case. 
                                                     
 
 
                                 
 
 
 
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
225
250
0 5 10 15
P enetration (mm)
Lo
ad
 (k
g)
S p.1 w.o. J GT
S p.2 w.o. J GT
S p.3 w.o. J GT
S p.1 with J GT
S p.2 with J GT
S p.3 with J GT
Avg. dry density = 17.0 kN/m3 
Avg. water content = 20.0% 
Avg. CBR w.o. JGT = 4.3% 
Avg. CBR with JGT = 6.5% 
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0 5 10 15
P enetration (mm)
Lo
ad
 (k
g)
S p.1 w.o. J GT
S p.2 w.o. J GT
S p.3 w.o. J GT
S p.1 with J GT
S p.2 with J GT
S p.3 with J GT
Avg. dry density = 17.7 kN/m3 
Avg. water content = 19.9% 
Avg. CBR w.o. JGT = 7.1% 
Avg. CBR with JGT = 9.2% 
 
 
736 
 
                                        
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                  
                                
 
 
 
 
                  Figure 7 Average CBR% vs. average dry density curves 
 
4.2.1. Formula for the calculation of CBR increase ratio 
 
CBR increase ratio= (CBR with JGT)/ (CBR without JGT)          
 
                      
                            
 
                                 
                            
                               
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                       
                                                                
                             
                Figure 8 CBR% increase ratio vs. maximum dry density curve 
 
5. Conclusions  
 
The main objective of the study was to figure out the effect of JGT on the strength of subgrade. 
Comparison of CBR value between specimens having JGT with specimens without JGT was the 
major concern of the study. In doing so, laboratory tests of CBR of given soil sample were 
performed. Jute geotextile (JGT) which is commercially known as ‘soil saver’ was used for the 
increment of CBR value of the sample, and it has brought a satisfactory result which reveal that 
the CBR increase ratio is 1.5 at 94.3% of its maximum dry density. 
    A series of CBR tests were performed on clay soil with and without JGT at the laboratory in 
order to study the effect of JGT on CBR values. CBR tests were conducted for soil sample 
0
2
4
6
8
10
14 15 16 17 18 19
 Average dry dens ity (kN/m3)
 A
ve
ra
ge
 C
B
R
 (%
)
W ithout J GT
W ith J GT
JGTwithoutCBR
JGTwithCBRratioincreaseCBR 
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
80 85 90 95 100 105
(% ) Maximum dry dens ity
C
B
R
 in
cr
ea
se
 r
at
io
 
 
737 
 
collected from the wok site with and without JGT samples at different dry densities using 
different compaction energy. The CBR value of the soil with JGT is always found to be higher 
than that of without JGT at all corresponding dry densities. The CBR increase ratio is 1.52 times 
at 94.3% of maximum dry density. 
   A deliberate laboratory tests on the soil samples collected from the work site revealed that the 
CBR value of soil increases with the inclusion of JGT reinforcements and CBR increase ratio 
increases with dry density up to a value of 1.5. We used a single layer of JGT between 1st and 2nd 
layer from the bottom. Multi layers of JGT can be used and hence a comparison can be made 
with the application of single layer. 
 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
The author expresses his gratefulness to all members of the Department of Civil Engineering, 
BUET and particularly the officials of the geotechnical laboratory for providing necessary 
facilities and cooperation during the period of the research. 
 
 
References 
 
Abdullah, A. B. M. (1999), “A Handbook on Synthetic Geotextiles Particularly Natural Synthetic 
Geotextiles from Jute and Other Vegetable Fibres”, Bangladesh Jute Research Institute, Dhaka, 
pp. 33-87. 
GoI (2008), “A Manual on Use of Jute Geotextiles in Civil Engineering”, Jute Manufactures 
Development Council, A Government of India Statutory Body, Ministry of Textile, pp 1-5. 
John, N. W. M. (1987), “Geotextiles”, Chapman and Hall, 29 West 35th Street, New York, pp 42-
43. 
Khan, A. J. (2008), “Quality Control of Jute Geotextiles and Development of Testing Facilities”, 
Proceedings of International Workshop on Jute Geotextiles – Technical Potential & 
Commercial Prospects, Kolkata, April 2008, p. 101-119. 
Khan, A. J. and Mohy, M. A. (2005), “Technical Assessment of Geojute for Long and Short Term 
Geotechnical Applications”, Proceeding of Third Annual Paper Meet and International 
Conference on Civil Engineering, p 357-368. 
Koerner, R. M. (1998), “Designing with Geosynthetics”, Fourth edition, Prentice Hall Inc., New 
Jersey, pp 171-190. 
Mohy, M. A. (2005), ‘Evaluation of Properties of Jute Geotextile and Its Assessment for Short 
Term and Long Term Civil Engineering Applications’, Thesis submitted in partial fulfilment 
of requirements for degree of M.Sc. Engineering, Department of Civil Engineering, 
Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technology, Dhaka 
Prodhan, Z. H. (2001), “Application of Jute Geotextile for Different Structures including Rural 
Roads with Slope Protection”, Project Paper on Slope Protection Work at Pakulla-Lauhati 
Road in Delduar Upazilla under Tangail District, Bangladesh, pp 1-8. 
 
 
738 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
WATER QUALITY ANALYSIS OF SURMA AND KUSHIYARA RIVER 
 
 
Tajmunnaher1 and Md. Aktarul Islam Chowdhury 2 
 
 
ABSTRACT: The river Surma and Kushiara, the two most important rivers of Bangladesh are major 
sources of surface water of Sylhet division. A research work was conducted to analyze and monitor 
the water quality of these two important rivers and was to determine the possibility of these rivers 
water to use as drinking purpose, to use as domestic purpose as well as to asses these sources of 
water for the possibility of using irrigation purpose to save the aquatic biodiversity of these rivers. To 
determine physical, chemical & biological parameters of water from these sources, both manual and 
automatic digital processes were chosen. Standard processes for Eh, pH, Temperature, TS, DS, SS, 
BOD, COD, FC, TC, Alkalinity, As, Fe and automatic digital processes for Cd turbidity 
determination. Water from both of these rivers contains lower concentration of DO & higher 
concentration of suspended solids; the water is also found acidic in nature.  Though total coliform 
(TC) is found in countable numbers, fecal coliform (FC) is rare.  The BOD & COD value is also high 
in some location. Obviously this river water free from fecal coliform can be an alternative source of 
drinking water supply for Sylhet city with some degree of treatment which will lower the risk of 
arsenic and other toxic metals contamination associated with the extensive use of ground water. And 
to keep these rivers biologically alive for long period proper treatment should be ensured while 
throwing waste effluent from efficient sources in these rivers. 
 
Key words: Surma, Kushiyara, Sylhet, water quality, pollution, biodiversity. 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Sylhet, is a major city in north-eastern Bangladesh, located on the banks of the Surma River 
surrounded by the Jaintia, Khasia and Tripura hills. Sylhet city, one of the largest cities in 
Bangladesh has a high population density, with nearly 500,000 people and is well known for its tea 
gardens and tropical forests. Although water in adequate quantity and safe quality is essential for 
human survival, rapid population growth and economic development puts tremendous pressure on 
limited freshwater resources. There are several significant water quality problems, of these; 
                                                             
1 Assisstant Professor, CEE Department, SUST, Sylhet, Bangladesh. moon_cee@yahoo.com 
2Professor, Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, SUST, Sylhet, Bangladesh. 
aic_cee@yahoo.com 
 
739 
 
contamination of drinking-water sources by pathogenic (disease-causing) microorganisms remains 
the most important. Contaminated water can cause disease outbreaks including cholera, dysentery, 
hepatitis  and cryptosporidiosis. From this point of view a study was undertaken to assess the water 
quality of Surma and Kushiara river with the following objectives: 
 
 Evaluating the existing water quality of the river Surma and Kushiyara, through the analysis 
of some selected water quality parameters such as pH, alkalinity, hardness, chloride, nitrate, 
BOD, DO, TS, TDS, TSS. 
 Determining water quality index by NSF method and 
 To compare the results with the Bangladesh standards and assessing the suitability of Surma 
and Kushiyara as the source of water supply. 
 
2. Materials and Methods 
 
2.1 Study Area  
The Surma River, a major river in Bangladesh, is the part of the Surma-Kushiyara-Meghna River 
System, that starts when the Barak River from northeast India divides at the Bangladesh border into 
the Surma and the Kushiyara rivers while the Kushiyara River, another major river in Bangladesh 
originating in the northern hill country of Assam, India and running along the border of the Indian 
states of Nagaland and Manipur before entering Bangladesh. Study area along the Surma and 
Kushiara river is shown in figure 1. 
 
 
 
Figure 1 Study area in the Surma-Kushiyara river basin 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                  Fig. 1 Study area in the Surma-Kushiyara river basin 
 
740 
 
2.2. Sampling Points 
 
Water samples were collected from pre-selected 15 points to investigate the water quality of both the 
rivers Surma and Kushiyara.    
 
2.3. Laboratory Test of Water Quality Parameters 
 
Digital pH meter, Electronic balance, Aerator, Titration unit, Incubator, Oven, Thermometer, 
Decicator, Suction filter etc are used in the analysis. pH meter directly measured the pH & eH of the 
sample. Membrane filter method was used for measuring Total & Fecal Coliform bacteria. Oven 
were used for evaporating the sample for determination of TS, DS, and SS Decicator was used for 
cooling the filter paper without moisture for determination of SS.Water sample from various point in 
Surma River & Kushiyara were collected and routine laboratory analysis made for physical, 
chemical, and biological qualities according to the standard method (APHA, AWWA, WPCF, 1998). 
 
2.4. Method of Assessing Water Quality Index 
 
The water quality index of water was measured adopting the National Sanitation Foundation Water 
Quality Index (NSF WQI). NSF WQI, an excellent management and general administrative tool in 
communicating water quality information. A water quality index provides a single number (like a 
grade) that expresses overall water quality at a certain location and time based on several water 
quality parameters. The objective of an index is to turn complex water quality data into information 
that is understandable and useable by the public. This index has been widely field tested and applied 
to data from a number of different geographical areas all over the world in order to calculate the 
overall quality of water. However, a water index based on some very important parameters can 
provide a simple indicator of water quality. Relative weights for nine factors corresponding to 
National Sanitation Foundation (Brian Oram, 2010) are used for the study. 
 
 
3. Data Analysis and Results 
 
3.1. Water Quality Analysis 
 
The sample were collected and analyzed from 15 points of each river. Obtained value for different 
parameters at different time and location are analyzed below. 
 
3.1.1. Temperature 
The fluctuation of temperature at different times and locations are presented in figure 2(a) for Surma 
river & in figure 2(b) for Kushiara river. The temperature in the river Surma is 25.93ºC in average 
and varies from 25ºC to 26.7ºC The maximum temperature value is 26.7ºC at 5 miles downstream of 
Shahjalal Bridge and the lowest temperature is 25ºC at Chatak (upstream). The temperature reading 
in the river Kushiyara is 26.65ºC in average and varies from 26ºC to 27.2ºC. The maximum 
741 
 
temperature is 27.2ºC at Fenchugonj (Ferry Ghat Upstream) and Sheora Bridge(Downstream-1)and 
the lowest temperature is 26.0ºC at Jokigonj-4. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2(a) Variation of temperature at different places at Surma River 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                          Figure 2(b) Variation of temperature at different places at Kushiyara River 
 
 
 
26.426.5
26.726.5
26 26.1
25.5
26.2 26
26.3
25.525.425.3
25
25.5
standard, 25
24
24.5
25
25.5
26
26.5
27
Te
m
pe
ra
tu
re
(ºc
)
Temperature
26.426.526.726.5
26 26.1
25.5
26.2 26
26.3
25.525.425.3 25
25.5
25 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 25 25
24
24.5
25
25.5
26
26.5
27
Te
m
pe
ra
tu
re
(ºc
)
Temperature 
742 
 
3.1.2. pH 
The test results of pH of different sampling points of Surma and Kushiyara river are presented in 
table 1 as tabular form. On the Surma river the fluctuations of pH was from 6.0 in Volagonj 
to 6.71 jointly  in Shahparan Bridge (Upstream)  and Kin Bridge. The average value of pH in 
Surma river is 6.59. The value of pH in river Kushiyara is 6.58 in average and varies from 6.32 to 
6.77. The maximum pH value is 6.77 at Sheora Bridge(downstream-2) .and the lowest pH value is 
6.32 at Jokigonj-4. It was also found that in Surma river the pH value in 13 sampling stations lies 
within the standard value (6.5 – 8.5) for aquatic life especially fish but at Volagonj and 
Chatak(downstream) the value of pH was below the standard limit. In case of Kushiyara river the 
values of pH at Jokigonj-1, 4&5 was under standard limit but other 12 sampling stations were within 
the standard limit. Therefore the water of Surma and Kushiyara was still suitable for the existence of 
aquatic life (flora and fauna) from the pH point of view. 
 
Table 1 Test results of pH 
 
SURMA KUSHIYARA 
SL. 
NO
. 
SITE pH SL. 
NO. 
SITE pH 
1 Shahparan Bridge(Upstream) 6.71 1 Monu Mukh(from Surma) 6.58 
2 Shahparan Bridge(1 mile Downstream) 6.68 2 Monu Mukh(from Kushiyara) 6.55 
3 Shahparan Bridge(5 miles 
Downstream) 
6.67 3 Fenchugonj(Ferry Ghat Upstream) 6.60 
4 Khadim Nagar 6.63 4 Fenchugonj(Ferry Ghat 
Downstream) 
6.65 
5 Alampur River Site 6.62 5 Fenchugonj(jetty Ghat -1) 6.58 
6 Shahjalal Bridge 6.68 6 Fenchugonj(jetty Ghat -2) 6.52 
7 Volagonj 6.0 7 Sheora Bridge(Upstream-1)  6.75 
8 Kin Bridge 6.71 8 Sheora Bridge(Upstream-2) 6.68 
9 Sheikh Ghat Kajir Bazar 6.62 9 Sheora Bridge(Downstream-1) 6.72 
10 Sheikh Ghat (Jitumia Point ) 6.66 10 Sheora Bridge(Downstream-2) 6.77 
11 Akhalia Ghat 6.63 11 Jokigong-1 6.45 
12 Tukher Bazaar 6.67 12 Jokigong-2 6.52 
13 Lama Gazi 6.54 13 Jokigong-3 6.55 
14 Chatak (Upstream) 6.54 14 Jokigong-4 6.32 
15 Chatak (Downstream) 6.49 15 Jokigong-5 6.44 
 
3.1.3. eH 
Fluctuation of eH at different times and locations are presented in table 2. The value of eH in river 
Surma is 30.933 in average and varies from 15 to 62 the maximum eH value is 55 at Shahparan 
Bridge(5 milesdownstream) and the lowest eH value is 15 at Chatak (downstream).The value of eH 
in river Kushiyara is 27 in average and varies from 18 to 38; the maximum eH value is 38 at 
743 
 
Monumukh (from Kushiyara); and the lowest eH value is 18 at Fenchugonj(Jetty Ghat-1) and Sheora 
Bridge (upstream). The positive value of eH indicates the liquid stream in the oxidizing condition 
with sufficient amount of dissolved oxygen in both of the river Surma and Kushiyara to maintain a 
suitable condition for the survival of aquatic species and fishes. Low eH value disfavor the habitat 
condition of fishes in Chatak, Volagong, Kin Bridge and Sheikh Ghat of Surma river. In Kushiyara 
unsuitable condition for fish and aquatic species with low eH is located in Fenchugonj area. 
 
Table 2 Test results of eH 
SURMA KUSHIYARA 
SL. 
NO 
SITE eH SL. 
NO. 
SITE eH 
1 Shahparan Bridge(Upstream) 45 1 Monu Mukh(from Surma) 36 
2 Shahparan Bridge(1 mile 
Downstream) 
50 2 Monu Mukh(from Kushiyara) 38 
3 Shahparan Bridge(5 miles 
Downstream) 
55 3 Fenchugonj(Ferry Ghat Upstream) 25 
4 Khadim Nagar 30 4 Fenchugonj(Ferry Ghat Downstream) 21 
5 Alampur River Site 24 5 Fenchugonj(jetty Ghat -1) 18 
6 Shahjalal Bridge 23 6 Fenchugonj(jetty Ghat -2) 24 
7 Volagonj 22 7 Sheora Bridge(Upstream-1)  18 
8 Kin Bridge 17 8 Sheora Bridge(Upstream-2) 24 
9 Sheikh Ghat Kajir Bazar 23 9 Sheora Bridge(Downstream-1) 23 
10 Sheikh Ghat (Jitumia Point ) 24 10 Sheora Bridge(Downstream-2) 30 
11 Akhalia Ghat 25 11 Jokigong-1 30 
12 Tukher Bazaar 24 12 Jokigong-2 31 
13 Lama Gazi 30 13 Jokigong-3 35 
14 Chatak (Upstream) 17 14 Jokigong-4 28 
15 Chatak (Downstream) 15 15 Jokigong-5 24 
 
3.1.4. Dissolved Oxygen (DO)  
The test results of DO and fluctuation of these value at various point are presented in table 3. The 
value of DO in river Surma is 10.64 mg/l In average and varies from 5.2 to 14. The maximum DO 
value is 14 mg/l at alampur river site and the lowest DO value is 5.2mg/l at SeikhGhat Kajir Bazar. 
The value of DO in river Kushiyara is 10.93 mg/l In average and varies from 8.4 to 12.2 The 
maximum DO value is 12.2 mg/l Monu mukh (from surma) and Sheora Bridge(Downstream-1)  and 
the lowest DO value is 8.4 mg/l at Fenchugonj(jetty Ghat -2). Except Volagonj, Chatak, Kin Bridge, 
SheikhGhat and Tuker Bazar, dissolved oxygen in Surma river are always positively higher than 
standard value 6 mg/l. High dissolved oxygen signifying the better oxidizing condition also 
supported by comparatively higher eH values always desirable for the better growth and higher 
population of aquatic organisms like flora, fauna and fishes in the water stream. In Surma river, water 
is still suitable for aquatic organisms and fishes. However water of Surma river is deteriorating from 
the view point of DO; for instance in Volagong due to stone extraction and crushing activities, in 
744 
 
Chatak due to industrial activities, in Sheikh Ghat & Tuker Bazar due to urban activities like fish & 
kitchen markets, discharge from rice mills etc. to the river. In Fenchugonj owing to lack of DO, water 
quality is deteriorating continuously caused by direct discharge of industrial waste from fertilizer 
factory to the river without proper treatment. 
 
Table 3 Test results of DO (mg/l) 
 
SURMA KUSHIYARA 
SL. 
NO 
SITE DO SL. 
NO 
SITE DO 
1 Shahparan Bridge(Upstream) 12.6 1 Monu Mukh(from Surma) 12.2 
2 Shahparan Bridge(1 mile Downstream) 12.4 2 Monu Mukh(from Kushiyara) 11.2 
3 Shahparan Bridge(5 miles Downstream) 13.8 3 Fenchugonj(Ferry Ghat Upstream) 10.0 
4 Khadim Nagar 13.2 4 Fenchugonj(Ferry Ghat Downstream) 
10.4 
5 Alampur River Site 14 5 Fenchugonj(jetty Ghat -1) 8.6 
6 Shahjalal Bridge 12.2 6 Fenchugonj(jetty Ghat -2) 8.4 
7 Volagonj 8 7 Sheora Bridge(Upstream-1)  8.8 
8 Kin Bridge 9.4 8 Sheora Bridge(Upstream-2) 10.6 
9 Sheikh Ghat Kajir Bazar 5.2 9 Sheora Bridge(Downstream-1) 12.2 
10 Sheikh Ghat (Jitumia Point ) 9.2 10 Sheora Bridge(Downstream-2) 11.4 
11 Akhalia Ghat 11 11 Jokigong-1 11.2 
12 Tukher Bazaar 8 12 Jokigong-2 10.0 
13 Lama Gazi 11.6 13 Jokigong-3 10.4 
14 Chatak (Upstream) 10 14 Jokigong-4 9.2 
15 Chatak (Downstream) 9 15 Jokigong-5 9.8 
 
 
3.1.5. Alkalinity as CaCO3 
The alkalinity of water is a measure of its capacity to neutralize acids. The test results of alkalinity at 
various points of both the rivers are presented in table 4. The value of alkalinity in river Surma is 
15.25 mg/l in average and varies from 10.2 mg/l to 18.7 mg/l. The maximum alkalinity value is 18.7 
mg/l at Akhalia Ghat and the lowest value is 10.2 mg/l at Kin Bridge. The value of alkalinity in river 
Kushiyara is 17.21mg/l in average and varies from 13.4 mg/l to 22 mg/l. The maximum value is 22 
mg/l at Monumukh(from Kushiyara) and  the lowest value is 13.4 at Jokigonj-5. In all sampling 
stations of both  of the Surma and Kushiyara river alkalinity values of water are positively much 
lower than standard limit of Bangladesh water quality standard.  
 
3.1.6. Turbidity 
Turbidity is the cloudiness or haziness of a fluid caused by individual particles (suspended solids) 
that are generally invisible to the naked eye, similar to smoke in air. The measurement of turbidity is 
a key test of water quality. The test results of turbidity and fluctuation of these values at various point 
745 
 
Table 4 Test results of Alkalinity (mg/l as CaCO3) 
 
SURMA KUSHIYARA 
SL. 
NO
. 
SITE Alkalinit
y as 
CaCO3 
(mg/l) 
SL. 
NO. 
SITE Alkalinity as 
CaCO3 (mg/l) 
1 Shahparan Bridge(Upstream) 15.2 1 Monu Mukh(from Surma) 20.2 
2 Shahparan Bridge(1 mile 
Downstream) 
14.8 2 Monu Mukh(from 
Kushiyara) 
22 
3 Shahparan Bridge(5 miles 
Downstream) 
17.3 3 Fenchugonj(Ferry Ghat 
Upstream) 
18.2 
4 Khadim Nagar 14.5 4 Fenchugonj(Ferry Ghat 
Downstream) 
17.6 
5 Alampur River Site 12.5 5 Fenchugonj(jetty Ghat -1) 18 
6 Shahjalal Bridge 14.2 6 Fenchugonj(jetty Ghat -2) 14.5 
7 Volagonj 12.3 7 Sheora Bridge(Upstream-1)  17.8 
8 Kin Bridge 10.2 8 Sheora Bridge(Upstream-2) 15.4 
9 Sheikh Ghat Kajir Bazar 18.2 9 Sheora Bridge(Downstream-
1) 
15.3 
10 Sheikh Ghat (Jitumia Point ) 17.2 10 Sheora Bridge(Downstream-
2) 
15.2 
11 Akhalia Ghat 18.7 11 Jokigong-1 17.2 
12 Tukher Bazaar 17.5 12 Jokigong-2 17.4 
13 Lama Gazi 17.2 13 Jokigong-3 17.5 
14 Chatak (Upstream) 14.3 14 Jokigong-4 18.4 
15 Chatak (Downstream) 14.6 15 Jokigong-5 13.4 
 
are presented in table 5. The value of turbidity in river Surma is 19.94NTU in average and varies 
from 14.25 to 31.32NTU. The maximum turbidity value is 31.32NTU at Volagonj and the lowest 
turbidity value is 14.25 NTU at Seikh Ghat Kajir Bazar point. The value of turbidity in river 
Kushiyara is 16.97 NTU In average and varies from 13.47NTU to 22.14NTU. The maximum 
turbidity value is 22.14NTU at Fenchuganj jettiGhat-2 .and the lowest turbidity value is 13.47NTU at 
Jokigonj-1.  
Table 5 Test results of Turbidity (NTU) 
 
SURMA KUSHIYARA 
SL. 
NO 
SITE Turbidity  
NTU 
SL. 
NO. 
SITE Turbid
ity  
NTU 
1 Shahparan Bridge(Upstream) 19.95 1 Monu Mukh(from Surma) 18.03 
2 Shahparan Bridge(1 mile 16.65 2 Monu Mukh(from Kushiyara) 17.54 
746 
 
Downstream) 
3 Shahparan Bridge(5 miles 
Downstream) 
17.48 3 Fenchugonj(Ferry Ghat 
Upstream) 
18.44 
4 Khadim Nagar 25.35 4 Fenchugonj(Ferry Ghat 
Downstream) 
19.34 
5 Alampur River Site 22.47 5 Fenchugonj(jetty Ghat -1) 21.33 
6 Shahjalal Bridge 19.54 6 Fenchugonj(jetty Ghat -2) 22.14 
7 Volagonj 31.32 7 Sheora Bridge(Upstream-1)  14.25 
8 Kin Bridge 18.89 8 Sheora Bridge(Upstream-2) 16.24 
9 Sheikh Ghat Kajir Bazar 14.25 9 Sheora Bridge(Downstream-1) 13.75 
10 Sheikh Ghat (Jitumia Point ) 15.00 10 Sheora Bridge(Downstream-2) 17.14 
11 Akhalia Ghat 22.24 11 Jokigong-1 13.47 
12 Tukher Bazaar 17.90 12 Jokigong-2 14.55 
13 Lama Gazi 19.33 13 Jokigong-3 15.24 
14 Chatak (Upstream) 18.15 14 Jokigong-4 17.46 
15 Chatak (Downstream) 20.55 15 Jokigong-5 15.68 
 
 
3.1.7. Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD5) 
The BOD is the measurement of oxygen consumed by living organisms (mainly bacteria). It is used 
to measure the purification capacity of streams and serves regulatory authorities checking the quality 
water source. Low the BOD, higher the desirability of using water for human use, like drinking & 
domestic purposes. For drinking water, BOD should be nil. The test results of BOD5 and fluctuation 
of these values at various points are presented in table 6. In Surma River the average value of BOD5 
is 4.76mg/l and maximum value 9.4mg/l at kin Bridge and minimum 2mg/l at Volagonj. And at 
Kushiyara river the average value of BOD5 is 5.13 mg/l, maximum value 8.2 mg/l at Fenchugonj 
Jetty Ghat and minimum 3.4 mg/l at Fenchugonj Ferry Ghat-2 and Sheora Bridge(Upstream-2). In 
Surma river, highest BOD5 is observed in Kin Bridge area due to the direct defecation of human faces 
from a number of slum areas to the river. In Kushiyara river, highest BOD5 occurs in Fenchugonj due 
to direct discharge of industrial waste from fertilizer factory. In nowhere of the sampling stations of 
both the rivers, BOD5 is nil meaning that river water of the Surma and the Kushiyara is not fit at all 
for drinking purposes without proper treatment. Besides the BOD5 in all sampling locations of the 
Kushiyara river and the Surma river except one location Volagong are always higher than standard 
limit of BOD of Bangladesh Water Quality Standard meaning that water of both the rivers cannot be 
adequately used for domestic purposes without treatment. 
 
3.1.8. Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD) 
The test results of COD at various point are presented in table 7. In Surma River the average value of 
COD is 7.05mg/l and is maximum value 14mg/l at kin Bridge and minimum 5mg/l at Jitumia point 
of Sheikh Ghat. And in Kushiyara River the average value of COD is 6.65 mg/l, maximum value 11 
mg/l at Fenchugonj (Jetty Ghat-1) and minimum 4.8 mg/l. at Sheora Bridge (upstream-1). 
 
 
747 
 
Table 6 Test results of Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) 
SURMA KUSHIYARA 
SL. 
NO
. 
SITE BOD5 
(mg/l) 
SL. 
NO. 
SITE BOD5  
(mg/l) 
1 Shahparan Bridge(Upstream) 4.0 1 Monu Mukh(from Surma) 5.2 
2 Shahparan Bridge(1 mile 
Downstream) 4.5 
2 Monu Mukh(from Kushiyara) 5.6 
3 Shahparan Bridge(5 miles 
Downstream) 4.3 
3 Fenchugonj(Ferry Ghat Upstream) 3.4 
4 Khadim Nagar 6.6 4 Fenchugonj(Ferry Ghat Downstream) 3.8 
5 Alampur River Site 4.3 5 Fenchugonj(jetty Ghat -1) 7.8 
6 Shahjalal Bridge 4.4 6 Fenchugonj(jetty Ghat -2) 8.2 
7 Volagonj 2 7 Sheora Bridge(Upstream-1)  3.6 
8 Kin Bridge 9.4 8 Sheora Bridge(Upstream-2) 3.4 
9 Sheikh Ghat Kajir Bazar 5.2 9 Sheora Bridge(Downstream-1) 4.2 
10 Sheikh Ghat (Jitumia Point ) 3.2 10 Sheora Bridge(Downstream-2) 4.8 
11 Akhalia Ghat 3.8 11 Jokigong-1 5.2 
12 Tukher Bazaar 4 12 Jokigong-2 5.6 
13 Lama Gazi 4.6 13 Jokigong-3 6.0 
14 Chatak (Upstream) 5.4 14 Jokigong-4 5.4 
15 Chatak (Downstream) 5.8 15 Jokigong-5 4.8 
 
Table 7 Test results of Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD) 
 
SURMA KUSHIYARA 
SL. 
NO 
SITE COD  
(mg/l) 
SL. 
NO. 
SITE COD  
(mg/l
) 
1 Shahparan Bridge(Upstream) 5.8 1 Monu Mukh(from Surma) 7.4 
2 Shahparan Bridge(1 mile 
Downstream) 6.6 
2 Monu Mukh(from Kushiyara) 7.0 
3 Shahparan Bridge(5 miles 
Downstream) 6.3 
3 Fenchugonj(Ferry Ghat 
Upstream) 
5.0 
4 Khadim Nagar 9.7 4 Fenchugonj(Ferry Ghat Downstream) 
5.3 
5 Alampur River Site 6.3 5 Fenchugonj(jetty Ghat -1) 11 
6 Shahjalal Bridge 6.5 6 Fenchugonj(jetty Ghat -2) 5.2 
7 Volagonj 3.0 
 
7 Sheora Bridge(Upstream-1)  4.8 
8 Kin Bridge 14 8 Sheora Bridge(Upstream-2) 6.0 
9 Sheikh Ghat Kajir Bazar 7.5 9 Sheora Bridge(Downstream-1) 6.6 
748 
 
10 Sheikh Ghat (Jitumia Point ) 5.0 10 Sheora Bridge(Downstream-2) 7.5 
11 Akhalia Ghat 5.2 11 Jokigong-1 7.6 
12 Tukher Bazaar 6.4 12 Jokigong-2 8 
13 Lama Gazi 7.0 13 Jokigong-3 6.8 
14 Chatak (Upstream) 8.0 14 Jokigong-4 6.6 
15 Chatak (Downstream) 8.5 15 Jokigong-5 5.0 
 
3.1.9. Solid Contents 
Total solid (TS), Dissolved solid (DS), Suspended solid (SS) present at different points at these two 
rivers are shown in table 8(a), 8(b) & in 8(c). In Surma River the average value of total solid is 238.8 
mg/l and is maximum value 363 mg/l at Volagonj due to a huge amount of stone extraction and 
minimum 175mg/l at Shahparan Bridge. And in Kushiyara River the average value of total solid is 
210.07 mg/l and is maximum value 290 mg/l at Monumukh and minimum 158 mg/l at Jokigonj. 
Total solids in Volagonj is extremely high due to gigantic and extensively extraction activities of 
stones, sand etc. 
Table 8(a) Test results of TS (mg/l) 
 
SURMA KUSHIYARA 
SL. 
NO 
SITE TS SL. 
NO. 
SITE TS 
1 Shahparan Bridge(Upstream) 175 1 Monu Mukh(from Surma) 290 
2 Shahparan Bridge(1 mile 
Downstream) 
222 2 Monu Mukh(from Kushiyara) 275 
3 Shahparan Bridge(5 miles 
Downstream) 
198 3 Fenchugonj(Ferry Ghat Upstream) 242 
4 Khadim Nagar 252 4 Fenchugonj(Ferry Ghat Downstream) 230 
5 Alampur River Site 194 5 Fenchugonj(jetty Ghat -1) 245 
6 Shahjalal Bridge 177 6 Fenchugonj(jetty Ghat -2) 262 
7 Volagonj 363 7 Sheora Bridge(Upstream-1)  178 
8 Kin Bridge 275 8 Sheora Bridge(Upstream-2) 190 
9 Sheikh Ghat Kajir Bazar 254 9 Sheora Bridge(Downstream-1) 175 
10 Sheikh Ghat (Jitumia Point ) 246 10 Sheora Bridge(Downstream-2) 184 
11 Akhalia Ghat 204 11 Jokigong-1 165 
12 Tukher Bazaar 225 12 Jokigong-2 158 
13 Lama Gazi 261 13 Jokigong-3 195 
14 Chatak (Upstream) 248 14 Jokigong-4 192 
15 Chatak (Downstream) 287 15 Jokigong-5 170 
 
In Surma River the average value of dissolved solid is 168.53mg/l and is maximum value 285mg/l at 
Volagonj and minimum 105mg/l at Shahparan Bridge (upstream). And in Kushiyara River the 
average value of dissolved solid is 129.33 mg/l and is maximum value 180mg/l at Monumukh and 
minimum at 90mg/l at Sheora Bridge(Downstream-1). In Surma river large amount of DS exists in 
Volagonj due to gigantic stone extraction activities; also large amount of DS are found in Chatak for 
749 
 
industrial activities and in Sheikh Ghat for indiscriminate urban activities in fish market, rice mills 
etc. In Kushiyara large amount of DS are observed in Monu Mukh for indiscriminate urban activities 
and in Fenchugonj for industrial discharge to the river. 
 
Table 8(b) Test results of DS (mg/l) 
 
SURMA KUSHIYARA 
SL. 
NO 
SITE DS SL. 
NO. 
SITE DS 
1 Shahparan Bridge(Upstream) 105 1 Monu Mukh(from Surma) 179 
2 Shahparan Bridge(1 mile 
Downstream) 
162 2 Monu Mukh(from Kushiyara) 180 
3 Shahparan Bridge(5 miles 
Downstream) 
144 3 Fenchugonj(Ferry Ghat Upstream) 158 
4 Khadim Nagar 158 4 Fenchugonj(Ferry Ghat Downstream) 150 
5 Alampur River Site 120 5 Fenchugonj(jetty Ghat -1) 153 
6 Shahjalal Bridge 124 6 Fenchugonj(jetty Ghat -2) 177 
7 Volagonj 285 7 Sheora Bridge(Upstream-1)  113 
8 Kin Bridge 185 8 Sheora Bridge(Upstream-2) 118 
9 Sheikh Ghat Kajir Bazar 173 9 Sheora Bridge(Downstream-1) 90 
10 Sheikh Ghat (Jitumia Point ) 201 10 Sheora Bridge(Downstream-2) 94 
11 Akhalia Ghat 125 11 Jokigong-1 110 
12 Tukher Bazaar 151 12 Jokigong-2 98 
13 Lama Gazi 187 13 Jokigong-3 103 
14 Chatak (Upstream) 195 14 Jokigong-4 122 
15 Chatak (Downstream) 213 15 Jokigong-5 95 
 
In Surma river the average value of suspended solid is 70.27mg/l and is maximum value is 94 mg/l at 
khadim Nagar and minimum 45 mg/l at Shekh Ghat (Jitumia point). And in Kushiyara River the 
average value of suspended solid is 80.73mg/l and is maximum value 111mg/l at Monumukh and 
minimum 55mg/l at Jokigonj-1. In Surma, comparatively large amount of SS exists in Khadim and 
kin Bridge due to indiscriminate urban activities. Similarly in Kushiyara, large amount of SS are 
available in Monu Mukh, Sheora Bridge-2 and Jokigonj for uncontrolled human activities and in 
Fenchugonj for industrial discharge directly to river. 
 
Table 8(c) Test results of SS (mg/l) 
 
SURMA KUSHIYARA 
SL. 
NO 
SITE SS SL. 
NO 
SITE SS 
1 Shahparan Bridge(Upstream) 70 1 Monu Mukh(from Surma) 111 
2 Shahparan Bridge(1 mile 
Downstream) 
60 2 Monu Mukh(from Kushiyara) 95 
3 Shahparan Bridge(5 miles 54 3 Fenchugonj(Ferry Ghat Upstream) 84 
750 
 
Downstream) 
4 Khadim Nagar 94 4 Fenchugonj(Ferry Ghat Downstream) 80 
5 Alampur River Site 74 5 Fenchugonj(jetty Ghat -1) 92 
6 Shahjalal Bridge 53 6 Fenchugonj(jetty Ghat -2) 85 
7 Volagonj 79 7 Sheora Bridge(Upstream-1)  65 
8 Kin Bridge 90 8 Sheora Bridge(Upstream-2) 72 
9 Sheikh Ghat Kajir Bazar 81 9 Sheora Bridge(Downstream-1) 85 
10 Sheikh Ghat (Jitumia Point ) 45 10 Sheora Bridge(Downstream-2) 90 
11 Akhalia Ghat 79 11 Jokigong-1 55 
12 Tukher Bazaar 74 12 Jokigong-2 60 
13 Lama Gazi 74 13 Jokigong-3 92 
14 Chatak (Upstream) 53 14 Jokigong-4 70 
15 Chatak (Downstream) 74 15 Jokigong-5 75 
 
3.1.10. Total Coliform (TC) 
Total coliform bacteria are a collection of relatively harmless microorganisms that live in large 
numbers in soils, plants and in intestines of warm-blooded (humans) and cold-blooded animals. 
Coliform aid  in the digestion of food. The test results of total coli form are presented in table 9. In 
Surma river average FC formed is 11 N/100ml. minimum 2 N/100ml at Alampur river site and 
Lamagazi, and maximum 40 at Kin Bridge. In Kushiyara  river average total coli form is 
3.93N/100ml. Minimum 0 N/100ml at Monu Mukh (from Surma), Fenchugonj (ferry Ghat 
downstream), Sheora Bridge (upstream-1,2) and Sheora Bridge (downstream-1), and maximum value 
is 24 N/100ml at Jokigonj-2. 
 
Table 9 Test results of Total Coliform Bacteria (TC) 
 
SURMA KUSHIYARA 
SL. 
NO
. 
SITE TOTAL 
COLIFOR
M (TC) 
SL. 
NO
. 
SITE TOTAL 
COLIFOR
M (TC) 
1 Shahparan Bridge(Upstream) 4 1 Monu Mukh(from Surma) 0 
2 Shahparan Bridge(1 mile 
Downstream) 3 
2 Monu Mukh(from Kushiyara) 2 
3 Shahparan Bridge(5 miles 
Downstream) 5 
3 Fenchugonj(Ferry Ghat 
Upstream) 3 
4 Khadim Nagar 10 4 Fenchugonj(Ferry Ghat Downstream) 0 
5 Alampur River Site 2 5 Fenchugonj(jetty Ghat -1) 8 
6 Shahjalal Bridge 3 6 Fenchugonj(jetty Ghat -2) 2 
7 Volagonj 14 7 Sheora Bridge(Upstream-1)  0 
8 Kin Bridge 40 8 Sheora Bridge(Upstream-2) 0 
9 Sheikh Ghat Kajir Bazar 24 9 Sheora Bridge(Downstream-1) 0 
10 Sheikh Ghat (Jitumia Point ) 3 10 Sheora Bridge(Downstream-2) 3 
751 
 
11 Akhalia Ghat 5 11 Jokigong-1 5 
12 Tukher Bazaar 17 12 Jokigong-2 24 
13 Lama Gazi 14 13 Jokigong-3 5 
14 Chatak (Upstream) 5 14 Jokigong-4 5 
15 Chatak (Downstream) 4 15 Jokigong-5 2 
 
3.1.11. Fecal Coliform (FC) 
Fecal Coliform generally occurs in the water due to the direct discharge of human and animal faces. 
The test results of fecal coli form are presented in table 10. In Surma river fecal coliform is found 
only at 4 points, they are Tukher bazaar river site (5 N/100ml), ShekhGhat Jitumia point (3 
N/100ml), Kin Bridge (13 N/100ml) and Khadim Nagar (2 N/100ml). In Kushiyara river fecal 
coliform bacteria was only found at three sampling points of Jokigonj-2&4 (20 N/100ml & 14 
N/100ml) and Fenchugonj Jetty Ghat-1(5 N/100 ml). In Surma river, higher number of FC exists in 
Kin Bridge point due to the open defecation & direct discharge of human faces from kutcha latrine of 
a number of slum areas. Higher number of FC exists at Jokigonj-2 & Jokigonj-4 point of the 
Kushiyara river due to open defecation from slum and squatters at Jokigonj. 
 
Table 10 Test results of Fecal Coliform Bacteria (FC) 
 
SURMA KUSHIYARA 
SL. 
NO 
SITE Facal 
Coliform 
(FC) 
SL. 
NO 
SITE Facal 
Colifor
m 
(FC) 
1 Shahparan 
Bridge(Upstream) 
0 1 Monu Mukh(from Surma) 0 
2 Shahparan Bridge(1 mile 
Downstream) 
0 2 Monu Mukh(from Kushiyara) 0 
3 Shahparan Bridge(5 miles 
Downstream) 
0 3 Fenchugonj(Ferry Ghat 
Upstream) 
0 
4 Khadim Nagar 2 4 Fenchugonj(Ferry Ghat 
Downstream) 
0 
5 Alampur River Site 0 5 Fenchugonj(jetty Ghat -1) 5 
6 Shahjalal Bridge 0 6 Fenchugonj(jetty Ghat -2) 0 
7 Volagonj 0 7 Sheora Bridge(Upstream-1)  0 
8 Kin Bridge 13 8 Sheora Bridge(Upstream-2) 0 
9 Sheikh Ghat Kajir Bazar 0 9 Sheora Bridge(Downstream-1) 0 
10 Sheikh Ghat (Jitumia Point 
) 
3 10 Sheora Bridge(Downstream-2) 0 
11 Akhalia Ghat 0 11 Jokigong-1 0 
12 Tukher Bazaar 5 12 Jokigong-2 20 
13 Lama Gazi 0 13 Jokigong-3 0 
752 
 
14 Chatak (Upstream) 0 14 Jokigong-4 14 
15 Chatak (Downstream) 0 15 Jokigong-5 0 
 
3.2. Water quality index (WQI) 
 
The Water Quality Index is an attempt to represent overall quality of water collected from 
pond/lake/river/storage/effluent channel etc. First samples are tested for desired parameters. Then the 
purpose of finding WQI is determined. The purpose will also select the choice of the parameters. 
Say, for example, if the suitability of lake water for drinking is the purpose, important parameters 
like colliform, pH or acidity, hardness, Iron, Cadmium, Biological Oxygen Demand, Total 
Suspended Solids, Total Suspended Solid etc. which represent suitability of the collected water for 
drinking is first determined from literature review or standard reports if available. Samples are then 
tested for the selected parameters. The next step will be to select a standard for maximum and 
minimum permissible limit. Once the results from the sampling is available the weighted average of 
the values of the parameters are calculated. Influential parameter for drinking water is given higher 
weightage than the other less influential ones. Generally from literature reviews it can be seen that 0-
20% represents least quality, 21-50% represent a quality better than the least but worse than the WQI 
of  51 and above.51-70% denotes good quality of water along with 71-90 and 91-100% where latter 
represents the best quality of the water for the desired purpose(say drinking). WQI may vary with 
respect to purpose and standards selected. Water Quality Index for the water collected from different 
points along the rivers Surma & Kushiyara are determined using NSF WQI. 
 
3.2.1 Calculation of NSF Water Quality Index at various sampling stations of Surma River 
To calculate WQI of Surma river, out of nine parameters, six parameters DO, BOD, pH, turbidity, 
total solids, temperature are considered for all sampling points, but in case of some points where FC 
value was found, were included in calculation of NSF WQI. Overall water quality index of Surma 
river at different sampling stations is cited in table 11. WQI of Surma river at various sampling 
points varies from the lowest value of 39.22 in Kin Bridge to the highest value of 50.70 in Lamagazi 
with an average water quality index of 43.744 indicating the bad quality of water in Surma river.  
The WQI of each of the sampling stations falls within the range of (25-50) according to the NSF 
water quality index. Obviously the water of the sampling stations was bad for aquatic flora and 
fauna. Among all the stations during observation the better water quality is found in Tuker Bazar and 
the worst among them in Volagonj, that means the water of Surma river can not be regarded safe and 
sound for drinking and domestic purposes. The situation should be tackled before deteriorating the 
water quality of Surma river more worser. 
 
3.2.2. Calculation of NSF Water Quality Index at various sampling stations of Kushiyara River 
To calculate NSF Water Quality Index of the Kushiyara river, six parameters DO, BOD, pH, 
turbidity, total solids, temperature are considered for all sampling points, but in case of some points 
where FC value was found, were included in calculation of NSF WQI. Overall Water Quality Index 
water at various sampling locations along the Kushiyara river is presented in the table 11. The overall 
water quality index of Kushiara river at various sampling points varies from 39.98% at Fenchugonj 
753 
 
Table 11 NSF WQI value of Surma and Kushiyara River 
 
SURMA KUSHIYARA 
SL. 
NO 
Different Sampling 
stations 
NSF 
WQI 
value 
SL. 
NO 
Different Sampling stations NSF 
WQI 
value 
1 Shahparan 
Bridge(Upstream) 
42.75 1 Monu Mukh(from Surma) 45.67 
2 Shahparan Bridge(1 mile 
Downstream) 
42.41 2 Monu Mukh(from Kushiyara) 43.44 
3 Shahparan Bridge(5 miles 
Downstream) 
46.08 3 Fenchugonj(Ferry Ghat 
Upstream) 
44.11 
4 Khadim Nagar 45.14 4 Fenchugonj(Ferry Ghat 
Downstream) 
49.23 
5 Alampur River Site 48.90 5 Fenchugonj(jetty Ghat -1) 43.14 
6 Shahjalal Bridge 39.98 6 Fenchugonj(jetty Ghat -2) 43.81 
7 Volagonj 47.66 7 Sheora Bridge(Upstream-1)  39.22 
8 Kin Bridge 47.73 8 Sheora Bridge(Upstream-2) 44.50 
9 Sheikh Ghat Kajir Bazar 46.70 9 Sheora Bridge(Downstream-1) 41.64 
10 Sheikh Ghat (Jitumia Point 
) 
45.80 10 Sheora Bridge(Downstream-2) 44.50 
11 Akhalia Ghat 44.39 11 Jokigong-1 43.44 
12 Tukher Bazaar 47.89 12 Jokigong-2 50.70 
13 Lama Gazi 43.27 13 Jokigong-3 41.84 
14 Chatak (Upstream) 47.11 14 Jokigong-4 41.28 
15 Chatak (Downstream) 43.81 15 Jokigong-5 39.64 
 
 (Jetty Ghat-2) to 48.90% at Fenchugonj (Jetty Ghat-1) with an average of 45.31%. The WQI of each 
of the sampling stations falls within the range of (25-50) according to the NSF water quality index. 
Obviously the water of the sampling stations was bad for aquatic flora and fauna. Among all the 
stations during observation the highest water quality is found in Fenchugonj(Jetty Ghat-1) and the 
lowest among them in Fenchugonj(Jetty Ghat-2).  
 
 
4. Discussion 
 
Untreated domestic sewage contains primarily biodegradable materials is being discharged 
indiscriminately in the Surma and Kushiyara river channel every day. Major water quality findings of 
Surma and Kushiyara river can be discussed as follows: 
 
754 
 
1. The river Surma and Kushiyara both contain water with slightly acidic in nature; this 
statement is supported by pH and alkalinity values. The value of pH of the river water vary 
between 6.0to6.71 (Surma), 6.32 to 6.77 (Kushiyara) and alkalinity value range from 10.2 to 
8.7 mg/l (Surma), 13.4 to 22 mg/l (Kushiyara) respectively. Bangladesh standards of pH for 
inland surface water are 6.5to8.5 for drinking, fishing, irrigation and industrial purposes 
(ECR, 1997). Evidently at some points the river water is not suitable for above mentioned 
purpose. But the standards for alkalinity for drinking water are 200-500 mg/l and from this 
context the water of the river Surma is satisfactory. 
2. The concentrations of dissolved oxygen of Surma & Kushiyara rivers are 10.64 mg/l and 
10.93mg/l in average. The depletion of dissolved oxygen concentration can be a serious 
problem for aquatic life. Bangladesh standards of dissolved oxygen are 6 mg/l or above for 
drinking purpose and 5mg/l or more recreational, irrigation & industrial purposes (ECR, 
1997). Thus with respect to dissolved oxygen the Surma and Kushiyara river water in a few 
locations are not satisfactory for drinking, fishing, recreation and industrial purpose. 
3. According to Bangladesh standards the permissible limit of BOD of inland surface water is 
2mg/l, 3 mg/l, and 6 mg/l for drinking, recreation and fishing purpose respectively (ECR, 
1997). Resonably with respect to organic matter the water of the Surma and Kushiyara River 
is satisfactory for fishing and recreational use at some location but not suitable for drinking. 
4. The COD value obtained in the river Surma and Kushiyara were 7.05mg/l and 6.65 mg/l 
respectively which is greater than their biological demands of oxygen as well as biologically 
degradable particle of these rivers. Bangladesh standards for chemical oxygen demand 
(COD) for drinking purpose is 4 mg/l or less. Logically with respect to COD the river of 
Surma and Kushiyara is not suitable for drinking purpose. 
5. The total solids at Surma and Kushiyara were 238.8 mg/l and 210.06 mg/l respectively in 
average. The dissolved solids at Surma and Kushiyara were 168.53mg/l and 129.33 mg/l 
respectively in average. The Bangladesh standards for dissolved solid are 1000mg/l (ECR, 
1997). Hence water from these rivers is suitable for drinking purpose. But from the view 
point of dissolved solid content suspended solids of Surma & Kushiyara were 70.26mg/l and 
80.73mg/l respectively on average. The Bangladesh standards for suspended solid are 10mg/l 
(ECR, 1997). Therefore with respect to Bangladesh standards for suspended solids, the river 
water of Surma & Kushiyara is not suitable for drinking. 
6. Bangladesh drinking water standards for pathogen (F.C) is 0 N/100ml where as the test result 
show the maximum value of F.C in the river Surma and Kushiyara are 13 N/100ml and 
20N/100ml respectively. So with respect to fecal coliform the water from this river is not 
suitable in some points for drinking purpose. Thus degree of treatment is required before it 
can be used as a drinking water. 
7. The overall water quality index of Surma river at various sampling points varies from the 
lowest value of 39.22 in Kin Bridge to the highest value of 50.70 in Lamagazi with an 
average water quality index of 43.744 indicating the bad quality of water in Surma river.  
8. The overall water quality index of Kushiara river at various sampling points varies from 
39.98% at Fenchugonj (Jetty Ghat-2) to 48.90% at Fenchugonj (Jetty Ghat-1) with an 
average of 45.31%  meaning the bad quality of water for aquatic flora and fauna.  
755 
 
5. Conclusions 
 
From the conducted study it is shown that the waste generation rate is increasing with time, but for 
restricted dumping sites and collection system almost half of the generated wastes are remained 
uncollected which finally discharge into the river Surma & Kushiyara through so many small and big 
charras are performing a considerable rule for the change of water quality of the Surma & Kushiyara. 
This statement is supported by available contents of total solids and dissolved solids, BOD, COD, 
Coli form found in the river of Surma. The amount of dissolved oxygen is also very low; here the 
minimum value is 5.2 mg/l (Surma) and 8.4 mg/l (Kushiyara) which is very threatening for the 
aquatic life especially for fish population. And chemically oxidizable wastes are present in greater 
than biologically oxidizable waste. Water from the river Surma is slightly acidic in nature and 
Kushiyara as well. Fecal coliform is also present in a considerable number in both of the rivers, 
which indicates the pathogenic pollution. With respect to TS, DS it can be used as a drinking water 
source without any treatment but with respect to SS, FC, DO, BOD & COD it may be used as a 
drinking water source after some degree of treatment. Therefore it can be concluded that the river 
Surma and Kushiyara water can be used as an alternative source of water supply instead of ground 
water for Sylhet region and locality if it is ensured that some degree of treatment should be provided 
and the uncollected wastes of the urban areas must not extensively pollute the water of these rivers 
discharging through the charras. The water quality of both of the rivers is seriously bad for aquatic 
flora and fauna. In order to save the flora and fauna as well as the aquatic biodiversity of Surma and 
Kushiyara river, due consideration should be taken through the adequate measure, to improve the 
water quality based on the continuous monitoring of water of both of the rivers.  
 
 
References 
 
APHA, AWWA, WPCF 1998. Standard methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater. 19th 
edition. 
ECR 1997 Environmental Conservation Rules, 1997. Ministry of Environment and Forest, 
Government of Bangladesh. 
Brian Oram 2010 The Water Quality Index: Monitoring the Quality of Surface waters, WQI Index-
Consumer Support Online Calculators. 
 
 756 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
ASSESSMENT OF GROUNDWATER POTENTIAL FOR IRRIGATION IN BARIND 
REGION BANGLADESH: AN APLLICATION OF TMWB MODEL 
 
 
Mahmudur Rahman1, A.T.M. Jahangir Alam2 and A H M Saadat3 
 
 
ABSTRACT: Irrigation in Bangladesh is mostly groundwater dependent. In the present study 
potential of groundwater recharge for irrigation has been assessed in the Barind region of 
Bangladesh for the period (1998-2008) by using TMWB model. The climatic data such as 
rainfall, temperature, sunshine, humidity, wind speed and soil moisture etc. has been used to run 
the model. The Geographical Information System (Arc GIS 9.2) was used to map the spatial 
distribution of recharge in the study area. Results imply no significant groundwater recharge 
during the dry season (November to May).  The average groundwater recharge was 458 mm, 667 
mm, 851 mm and 744 mm respectively in Godagari, Chapainawabganj, Tanore and Nachole 
stations respectively. The highest groundwater recharge was 1778 mm in 1999 in Nachole station 
and lowest recharge was only 59 mm in 2003 in Godagari station. In case of average monthly 
recharge, the highest recharge was found in the month of September (259 mm) in Tanore station 
and lowest recharge among the wet months was found in the month of October (20.0 mm) in 
Godagari station. The study also found that only half of the required net irrigation water can be 
fulfilled by this recharge. Though the study is an initial step to run a model base approach to 
quantify net irrigation demand the results of the study might be helpful for the agricultural 
planners and water engineers to plan proper cropping strategy and water resource management of 
the area. 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Bangladesh being mainly an agricultural country, water plays a vital role for its economic 
development, particularly in agricultural development. The sources of water in Bangladesh are 
surface water, groundwater and rainwater. The Ganges-Brahmaputra-Meghna river system 
discharges huge amount of surface water through Bangladesh, a part enters into ground to form 
groundwater. About 75 % of the water for irrigation in Bangladesh comes from groundwater 
(Shahid et al., 2006). Where as surface water potential is seasonal and limited during irrigation 
season (Reza and Mazumder, 2005).  But the situation is quite reverse in the northwestern part of 
the country specially the Barind Tract which is situated at latitude 24 º 25" to 25 º  10" N and 
longitude 88-89ºE (Alam, 2010). The area is extremely affected by shortage of water in all 
                                                        
1 MS student, Department of Environmental Sciences, Jahangirnagar University, Dhaka, Bangladesh 
(jonykgn@gmail.com) 
2 Former student, Department of Environmental Sciences, Jahangirnagar University, Dhaka, Bangladesh  
(kallal1022@gmail.com) 
3 A H M Saadat, Associate Professor, Department of Environmental Sciences, Jahangirnagar University, 
Dhaka, Bangladesh (ahmsaadat@gmail.com) 
 757 
Kharif, pre-Kharif and Rabi seasons. The Barind Multipurpose Development Authority (BMDA) 
has been working in this area since mid eighties to improve the potentiality of irrigation but 
recent studies from Saadat et al., (2009) found that around 85% of land remains fallow in dry 
season because of lack of water. Moreover Shahid and Behrawan (2008) affirmed that, many 
water-bodies including rivers, canals, ponds and other wetlands remained dried due to lack of 
inadequate rainfall in the dry season. So, the ground water of this area could be a significant 
source to meet the irrigation water requirement.  
      Several studies found in the literature (e.g. Bhuiyan, 1984; Shahid, 2011; Wahid et al., 2007; 
Yasmin, 2008 and Shahid and Hazarika (2010) which have significant contribution to 
understanding the ground water characteristics of Bangladesh and Barind region. Among these 
studies Shahid and Hazarika (2010) studied the groundwater drought in the northwestern districts 
of Bangladesh. Yasmin (2008) modeled the groundwater in the eastern part of Barind tract for its 
sustainable development and management whereas Wahid et al., (2007) assess the groundwater 
potential for irrigation in the Teesta Barrage project. In addition to these Shahid et al., (2006) 
studied the pollution vulnerability of groundwater in Barind region. More over Bhuiyan (1983) 
studied the groundwater potential for irrigation in all over Bangladesh. But no study found which 
include the potential of groundwater for irrigation, specifically in Barind region. Along with this 
there are few studies found in the literature that give incongruous result about the groundwater 
recharge potential of Barind region such as Islam and Kanumgoe (2005) stated that average 
annual recharge is about 152.7 mm where as  Asaduzzaman and Ruston (2006) found that total 
annual recharge of the groundwater of Barind area is 500 mm per year. Moreover Wahid (2003) 
explained that in northern part of Bangladesh, groundwater use for irrigation has increased 
significantly in the recent past.  He also cited that groundwater based irrigation system in this 
region has reached a critical phase as the water level has dropped below shallow phases in many 
areas. The results of these studies make it is clear that to solve these ambiguous results and assess 
the actual potential of groundwater for irrigation it requires a further study. 
      Groundwater recharge estimations are essential in any groundwater system analysis and could 
provide accurate information for sustainable use of groundwater resources. The calculation of the 
net groundwater recharge is a big challenge for the hydrologist since there is no specific method 
to find out the net recharge reliably. There are several methods for estimating net ground water 
recharge such as, lysimeters and seepage meters (Sophocleous, 2004; Misstear, 2000); the water 
table fluctuation method (Scanlon et al., 2002; Misstear, 2000); the catchment water balance 
method (Sophocleous, 2004); the zero flux plane method (Khalil et al., 2003; Scanlon et al., 
2002); the Darcy method (Sophocleous, 2004; Flint et al., 2002); inverse modelling (Kendy et al., 
2003); hybrid water fluctuation method (Sophocleous, 2004); empirical methods (Sophocleous, 
2004), and soil water balance models (Thronwaite and Mather, 1955).  Among these Soil water 
balance method has promising use in the arid and semi arid area. Several authors (e.g Handman 
et al., 1990; Kumar 1993; Kendy et al., 2003; Samper and Pisani 2009; Resse and Risser, 2010; 
Bakudukize et al., 2011) applied this method for estimating recharge in various parts of arid and 
semi- arid region of the world. As our study area Barind tract is considered as semi-arid region 
(Alam, 2010), that is why TMWB model has been used in Barind region for assessing the ground 
water recharge in the study area. The paper assess the potential of groundwater recharge in 
relation to rainfall in Barind region and also find out potentiality of these recharge to meet the 
crop water requirement.  
 
 
 
 758 
2. Study Area and Methodology  
 
2.1. Study area 
 
The Barind region is the driest part of the country in terms of rainfall. The region is characterized 
by high fluctuating rainfall and the ratio of dry to rainy months is found to be highest in 
Bangladesh.  Although the whole region has long cool winter, the maximum number of days with 
temperature above 40°C is observed in summer (Rahman, 1999). Daily rainfall data of 11 years 
from 1998-2008 of 4 rainfall stations of Barind region was collected from Bangladesh Water 
Development Board (BWDB). Map 1 shows the location of rainfall stations in the study area. 
Time series data including solar radiation, wind speed, maximum and minimum relative humidity 
are available at Bangladesh Meteorological Department (BMD) and this enabled the computation 
of the potential evapotranspiration using the standard Penman-Monteith equation. 
 
 
 
Figure 1 Location of the rainfall stations in the study area 
 
2.2. Methodology 
The calculation of ground water recharge by using Thronwaite and Mather Water Balance Model 
(TMWB) consists of two steps. In the first step it requires the calculation of potential 
evapotranspiration and in the second step it calculated the net recharge. 
 
2.2.1. Calculation of potential evapotranspiration 
Evapotranspiration is a key environmental parameter that deserves a lot of attention not only for 
efficient irrigation management but also for groundwater management schemes. Potential 
 759 
evapotranspiration is the amount of water that would be evaporated under an optimal set of 
conditions, among which is an unlimited supply of water. If the demand for water largely exceeds 
that which is actually available, soil moisture is depleted and plants eventually die (Ritter, 2006). 
There are several methods for estimating potential evapotranspiration. They are classified in four 
groups as: mass-transfer (e.g. Harbeck, 1962), temperature-based (e.g. Hargreaves and Sammani, 
1982; Blaney and Criddle, 1950) radiation-based (e.g. Priestley & Taylor, 1972; Makkink, 1957) 
and combination types. In this study, potential evapotranspiration is estimated using Penman-
Monteith equation (Allen, et al., 1998) which is an example of methods where a combination of 
several weather parameters is used to estimate potential evapotranspiration. 
 
PET  
 
Where PET = reference potential evapotranspiration (mm day-1), Rn = net radiation at the crop 
surface (MJm-2day-1), G = solar heat density (MJm-2day-1), γ = psychrometric constant (kPa °C-
1), T= mean air temperature (°C), u2 =wind speed at 2 m height (ms-1), es= saturation vapour 
pressure (kPa), ea = actual vapour pressure (kPa), es - ea = saturation vapour pressure deficit 
(kPa), ∆= slope of the saturation vapor pressure curve (kPa °C-1). Here calculation of potential 
evapotranspiration was performed by using CROPWAT 8 software. 
 
2.2.2 TMWB Model 
The basic equation to estimate the actual soil water storage (A, mm) is (Thornthwaite and 
Mather, 1955) 
A=                                                        (2) 
Where L is the accumulated potential water loss (mm) defines as the accumulated sum of the 
difference between precipitation (P, mm) and potential evapotranspiration (ETo, mm) and is 
the soil moisture holding capacity. 
                                           (3) 
Where  is the effective root depth (mm)  and  are respectively the field capacity and the 
wilting point of soil water contents (cm3 cm-3). 
Using i as an index to number the chosen period during the year (for monthly case, i= 1, 2…, 12),  
The equation is  
If (   (case I –dry seasosn): 
                                    (4) 
And                                                     =                                     (5) 
 If (   (case II –wet season: 
; If Ai  then   Ai  
And                                          (6) 
The actual evapotranspiration (ET , mm) for the period I can be computed as follows: 
 
                                                      (7) 
Where  is the soil water storage change between the periods i and i-1.  
The soil water deficit (D, mm) and Excess (E, mm) can be calculated as follows 
Case -1 (Dry season) 
 760 
                                       (8) 
Where  
Case II (Wet season) 
 
-E                                      (9) 
 
In the present study the calculation of excess water was computed using the software Thron 1 
developed by Mcgbe and Markstrom (2007). 
 
3. Results and Discussion 
 
3.1. Calculation of Groundwater recharge 
 
Potential evapotranspiration is one of the major elements for assessing the agricultural condition 
of an area. Moreover in the TMWB model potential evapotranspiration is a key input for 
calculating ground water recharge. The monthly potential evapotranspiration of the study area is 
calculated during the year 1998-2008 using the meteorological data such as Min temperature, 
Max temperature, humidity, wind speed and sunshine data of Rajshahi meteorological station. 
Apart from some monthly variations, inter annual values of the ETP remain noticeably the same. 
Higher mean monthly values are observed in the months of April to June when the temperature is 
very high compare to the other months while the low values are observed in the months of 
December and January (the low temperature) (figure 2). It is also found that the potential 
evapotranspiration of the study area is greater than precipitation during the months November to 
May. These results also support the comments of Alam (2010) Moreover these results assume that 
from the month of November the moisture content of the soil started to reduce and it totally 
depleted by January. For this reasons it requires huge amount of irrigated water for cultivating the 
Rabi and Pre-Kharif crops 
      Calculation of groundwater recharge carried out by using Thornthwaite-Mather (1955) 
equation which is based on the different meteorological data such as, rainfall, snowfall, 
evapotranspiration, Soil data such as moisture holding capacity of the soil, change in soil water 
storage etc. In the present study the calculation of excess water is computed using the software 
Thron1.10 developed by Mcgbe and Markstrom (2007). The recharge calculation data accounted 
from year 1998-2008. Rainfall data has been considered as the only input data whereas other data 
like snowfall or melt is omitted because in case of Bangladesh these are not applicable.  
      The recharge is calculated from the difference between total surplus water and change in soil 
water storage. From the accounted data of year 1998 to 2008, it is observed that the recharge 
varies due difference in the climatic pattern. Figure 3 illustrated the time series yearly 
groundwater recharge in four rainfall stations of Barind region. It is sensible that in all the 
stations highest recharge is occurred in the year 1999 (Godagari station 781 mm, 
Chapainwabganj station 1219 mm, Tanore station 1676 and Nachole station 1778 mm), it may be 
due to the long lasting flood of 1998, from which the soil of the area were sufficiently moist to 
hold the water. The lowest recharge was observed in the year 2003 at Godagari station (59 mm). 
In that year the others stations also experienced low water recharge. The annual recharge 
calculation by this method shows some dissimilarity with the results of Islam and Kanumgoe 
(2005) but significantly support the result Asaduzzaman and Ruston (2006). Islam and Kanumgoe 
(2005) stated that average annual recharge is about 152.7mm however Asaduzzaman and Ruston 
(2006) found that total annual recharge of the ground water of Barind area is 500 mm /year. 
 761 
These dissimilarities may be arising from the fact that TMWB model does not consider the 
aquifer structure and other geological condition. This method only considers how much water is 
being stored in the soil profile (Zimmermann, 2006) but a part of which may drained out by 
ground water runoff or may be used for domestics and other industrial purposes. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2 Monthly distribution of potential evapotranspiration of Barind region 
 
      In case of monthly recharge the figure 4 shows that there is no recharge occurred during the 
months December to May and the proportion of recharge during the months of October and 
November is also very negligible.  This results support the statement of Rahman (1999) which 
states that during dry months potential evapotranspiration is higher than rainfall. And potential 
evapotranspiration is lower than rainfall during the months June to September. The study also 
found that only negligible amount of rain occurred in the winter seasons (November to February) 
that is why no groundwater recharge occurred during these months. The highest recharge  found 
in the month of September (259 mm) this may be fact that by August soil filled is all moisture 
deficit and after that tend to recharged fully.  
 
 
 
Figure 3 Time series of average yearly ground water recharge in the 4 rainfall stations of the 
study area 
 762 
 
 
Figure 4 Average monthly groundwater recharge of the study area 
 
      Spatial distribution of ground water recharges shows that maximum amount of recharge has 
been occurred in the north-eastern part of the study area and minimum recharge in southern part 
of the study area. From the figure 5 it was experienced that 25% of the study area experienced 
recharge in between 625 to 704 mm and around 36% of the study area experience below this 
level (figure 5). 
      At present, the principal sources of groundwater recharge in the study area are rainfall and 
supplementary irrigation during the monsoon season. Based on the estimated recharge and 
observed rainfall, an empirical relationship between recharge and rainfall was developed by using 
rainfall and recharge data from 1998 to 2008. Table 1 illustrated that groundwater recharge varied 
within the variation of rainfall. It is observed that average monthly value of groundwater recharge 
totally dependent on rainfall. From the month of December to May the monthly rainfall is very 
low that is why the percentages of recharge is insignificant compare to rainfall. The highest 
groundwater recharge occurred in the month of September and the percentages of recharge vary 
from 55 to 70 percentages in this region. On an average the percentages of recharge to rainfall 
ranges from 20-25%, Which completely disagree with the result of Jahan et al., (2010) that claim 
that only 8.6% of the rainfall of Barind region stored as groundwater. This may be due to the 
cause that the runoff which also significantly contributes in the area was not considered in this 
model.  
 
3.2 Assessment of irrigation potential of the groundwater recharge 
 
Generally the major crops of the study area are three types of Paddy such as Transplanted Aman, 
Aus and Boro (Saadat et al., 2009). Among these Aus is planted in March and harvested in June. 
In addition Boro is transplanted during the month November to December and Harvested at the 
end of February (Jahan et al., 2000). On the other hand, Transplanted Aman is mainly known as a 
rain fed crops and it gets adequate rain in its each growth stages (Alam, 2010). That is why the 
irrigation requirement for Aus and Boro has been considered in the study.  
 
 763 
 
 
Figure 5 Spatial distribution of average groundwater recharge in the study area 
 
      To assess the groundwater use potential for irrigation recharge has been compared with the 
net irrigation water requirement of the area. In the recent times, farmers in the study area have 
solely depended on groundwater for dry-season irrigation (December/January–April) leading to 
unrestricted exploitation of the groundwater and groundwater level is successively lowering. But 
the annual average recharge of groundwater has no effect on the storage capacity of the ground 
water as the recharge is lower than the net irrigation requirement in most of the year.  From the 
Table 2 it has been estimated that net irrigation demand for paddy Aus was 127.25mm in the 
month of March, and respectively 169.01mm, 67.63 and 00 mm for the month of April, May and 
June. But there were no recharge estimated for these months. Similarly for paddy Boro net 
irrigation requirement was 112.29 mm for the month of December but no recharge has been 
occurred. Recharge mainly occurred in the month of June to October with an amount of 53.33 
mm and 19.09 mm 
      The study also found that the net irrigation requirement of the study area for cultivating two 
types of rice is around 800 mm but the average yearly recharge of the study area ranges from 458 
mm to 850 mm.  In some years the recharge has been exceeded this limit, But it could says that 
half of the proportion of stored water is used for domestic purposes of the people of this area. 
Therefore in the highest recharge year only the irrigation water requirement could be met by this 
recharge, otherwise only half or less than that required irrigation water can be fulfill by this 
recharge. 
 
 
 
 
 764 
Table 1 Rainfall and Groundwater recharge relationship 
 
Parameter Months 
 Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 
Godagari staton 
Monthly rainfall 10 12 29 48 149 263 281 212 254 113 32 0 
Monthly recharge 0 0 0 0 0 54 123 103 140 20 19 0 
Percentage Rainfall 0 0 0 0 0 20 44 49 55 18 58 0 
Chapainawabganj station 
Monthly rainfall 11 15 23 44 175 268 373 235 328 143 8 0 
Monthly recharge 0 0 0 0 11 53 209 124 212 65 0 0 
Percentage Rainfall 0 0 0 0 6 20 56 53 65 45 0 0 
Tanore station 
Monthly rainfall 6 25 45 60 158 313 346 276 370 180 11 15 
Monthly recharge 0 0 3 6 12 111 204 157 260 99 0 0 
Percentage Rainfall 0 0 6 9 8 35 59 57 70 55 0 0 
Nachole 
Monthly rainfall 6 11 25 48 135 296 372 269 333 156 6 12 
Monthly recharge 0 0 0 0 0 76 219 166 217 86 0 0 
Percentage Rainfall 0 0 0 0 0 26 59 62 65 55 0 0 
  
 
Table 2 Monthly Net Irrigation Requirements for the Two Major Crops Paddy Aus and Paddy 
Boro 
 
Month 
 
Net Irrigation Water Requirement (mm) 
Paddy Aus 
 March 
 
127.25 
April 
 
169.01 
May 
 
67.63 
June 
 
00 
Paddy Boro 
 November 
 
112.29 
December 
 
98.92 
January 
 
106.40 
February 
 
129.50 
(Source: Jahan et al., 2000) 
 
4. Conclusion 
 
This study has quantified with observation for 11 year period in the 4 upazila of Barind region, 
Bangladesh. In the recent times, farmers in the Barind region have solely dependent on 
groundwater for dry season (November/ December to April/ May) irrigation leading to 
unrestricted exploitation of the resource.  In the present study amount of water that may reached 
 765 
to the saturated zone had been calculated with the TMWB model to assess the potential of this 
recharge for irrigation purposes. It has been observed that during dry seasons (November to May) 
potential evapotranspiration is greater than the precipitation. That is why no significant ground 
water recharge is found during this period. The significant groundwater recharge has been found 
during the month June to September. Total amount of water that require for irrigation during the 
dry months were identified by reviewing the literature. It has been also evident that every year 
almost half of the required irrigated water is recharging. It is a first step to run a model base 
approach to quantify the irrigation potential of groundwater in Barind region. The results of this 
study may help the irrigation planner and water engineer to plan the cropping strategy and water 
resource management of Barind area Bangladesh. 
 
References 
 
Alam, A.T.M. J. (2010). Spatial and temporal characteristics of agricultural drought of Barind 
region, Bangladesh: An application of Markov chain model. M.S. Dissertation. Department of 
Environmental Sciences, Jahangirnagar University, Bangladesh. 
Allen, R. G., Pereira, L. S., Raes, D. and Smith, M. (1998). Crop evapotranspiration: guidelines 
for computing crop water requirements. FAO Irrigation and Drainage Paper, No. 56, Rome, 
Italy, 328. 
Asaduzzaman, M. and Rushton K. R. (2006). Improved yield from aquifers of limited saturated 
thickness using inverted wells. J Hydrol. 326:311–324. 
Bakundukize, C., Camp, M. V. and Walraevens, K. (2011). Estimation of groundwater recharge in 
Bugesera region (Burundi) using soil moisture Budget approach. Geologica Belgica. 14/1-2: 
85-102. 
Bhuiyan, I. S. (1984). Groundwater use for irrigation in Bangladesh: The prospects and some   
emerging issues: Agricultural Administration. 16: 181-207. 
Blaney, H. F. and Criddle, W. D. (1950). Determining water requirements in irrigated area from 
climatological irrigation data. US Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, 
Technical Paper No. 96: 48. 
Flint, A. L., Flint, L. E., Kwicklis, E. M., Fabryka-Martin, J. T. and Bodvarsson, G. S. (2002). 
Estimating recharge at Yucca Mountain, Nevada, USA: comparison of methods. Hydrogeol J 
(in press). Doi10.1007/s10040-001-0169-1. 
Handman, E. H., Londquist, C. J. and Maurer, D. K. (1990) Ground-water resources of Honey 
Lake Valley, Lassen County, California, and Washoe County, Nevada. US Geological Survey 
Water-Resource Investigation Report. 90–4050, 112. 
Harbeck, G. E. Jr. (1962). A practical field technique for measuring reservoir evaporation utilizing 
mass transfer theory. United States Geological Survey Professional Paper, 272(E): 101–105. 
Hargreaves, G. L. and Samani, Z. A. (1982). Estimating potential evapotranspiration. Journal of 
Irrigation and Drainage Engineering, 108(3): 225–230. 
Islam, M. M. and Kanumgoe, P. (2005) Natural recharge to sustainable yield from the Barind 
aquifer: a tool in preparing effective management plan of groundwater resources. Water Sci 
Technol. 52:251–258. 
Jahan, C. S., Mazumder, Q. H., Islam, A. T. M. M. and Adham, M. I. (2010). Impact of Irrigation 
in Barind Area, Northwestern Bangladesh–A Evaluation Based on the Meteorological 
Parameters and Fluctuation Trend in Groundwater Table, Geological society. 76 , India:134-
142. 
Kendy, E., Gerard-Marchant, P., Walter, M. T., Zhang, Y., Liu, C. and Steenhuis, T. S.  (2003). A 
 766 
soil-water-balance approach to quantify groundwater recharge from irrigated cropland in the 
North China Plain. Hydrol. Process. 17, 2011–2031. 
Khalil, M., Sakai, M., Mizoguchi, M. and Miyazaki, T., (2003). Current and Prospective 
Applications of zero flux plane (ZFP) method. Journal of the Japanese Society of Soil 
Physics, 95:75-90. 
Kumar, C. P. (1993). Estimation of Ground Water Recharge due to Rainfall by Modelling of Soil 
Moisture Movement. National Institute of Hydrology, Technical Report.142:66. 
Makkink,G. F. (1957). Testing the Penman formula by means of lysimeters. Journal of the 
Institution of Water Engineers. 11: 277-288. 
McCabe, G. J. and Markstrom, S. L. (2007). A monthly water-balance model driven by a 
graphical user interface. U.S. Geological Survey Open-File report 2007-1088:6. 
Misstear, B. D. R. (2000). Groundwater recharges assessment: a key component of river basin 
management. In: Irish National Committees of the International Hydrology Programme and 
the International Committee for Irrigation and Drainage (ed.), Proceedings of National 
Hydrology Seminar on River Basin Management, Tullamore, 52–59. 
Priestley, C. H. B. and Taylor, R. J. (1972). On the assessment of surface heat flux and 
evaporation using large-scale parameters. Monthly Weather Review. 100(2):81–92. 
Rahman, M.S. (1999). A Stochastic simulated first-order Markov chain model for daily rainfall at 
Barind, Bangladesh, Journal of Interdisciplinary Mathematics. 2(1): 7-32. 
Reese, S. O. and Risser, D.W. (2010). Summary of groundwater-recharge estimates for 
Pennsylvania. Pennsylvania Geological Survey, 4 series. Water Resource Report, 70:18. 
Reza, A. H. M. S. and Mazumder, Q. H. (2005). Evaluation of Hydrogeological conditions of 
Sapahar and Porsha Upazillas, Barind Tract, Bangladesh. J. Life Earth Science. 1: 15-20. 
Ritter, M. E. (2006). The physical environment: An introduction to Physical Geography.Available 
online   at: http://www.uwsp.edu/geo/faculty/ritter/geog101/ textbook/title_page.html. 
Saadat, A. H. M., Alam, A.T.M. J., Alam. M., Shovon, J. and Uzzaman, R. (2009).  Impact of 
Drought on agriculture of Barind Barind Tract: A Case Study of Dharmapur, Chapai 
Nawabgang. Proc. Workshop on Impacts of Climate Change on Livelihoods, Agriculture, 
Aquaculture and Fisheries Sector of Bangladesh, BAU, 54-64.  
Samper, J., Pisani, B. (2009). Aquifer Recharge Evaluation by a Combination of Soil Water 
Balance and Groundwater Flow Models. Estudios en la Zona no Saturada del Suelo. Vol IX, 
O. Silva et al. Barcelona.  
Scanlon, B. R., Healy, R. W. and Cook, P. G. (2002). Choosing appropriate techniques for 
quantifying groundwater recharge. Hydrogeology Journal. 10:18–39. Doi 10.1007/s10040-
0010176-2. 
Shahid, S. (2011). Impact of climate change on irrigation water demand of dry season Boro rice 
in northwest Bangladesh. Climatic Change .105:433–453. 
Shahid, S and Hazarika, M.K. (2010).Groundwater drought in the western districts of 
Bangladesh. Water REsour Manage. 24:1989-2006. 
Shahid, S., Behrawan, H. (2008). Drought risk assessment in the western part of  Bangladesh. 
Natural   Hazards. 46:391–413. Doi: 10.1007/s11069-007-9191-5. 
Shahid, S., Chen, X., Hazarika, M. K. (2006).  Evaluation of Groundwater Quality for Irrigation 
in Bangladesh Using Geographic Information System. Hydrol. Hydromech. 54:13–14. 
Sophocleous, M. (2004). Groundwater recharge. In Sylveira, L. and Usunoff, E. J. (eds.), 
Groundwater, in Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems (EOLSS), Developed under the 
Auspices of the UNESCO, Eolss Publishers, Oxford, UK, and 41. (http://www.eolss.net). 
Thornthwaite, C. W. and Mather, J. R. (1955). The water balance: Centerton N.J., Laboratory of 
 767 
Climatology. Publications in Climatology, 8:1-104. 
Wahid, S., Babel, M., Gupta, A. D., Roberto, S. and Clemente (2007). Spatial assessment of 
groundwater use potential for irrigation in Teesta Barrage Project in Bangladesh. Hydrogeol J. 
15(2):365–382. 
Wahid, S.M. (2003). Assessment of groundwater potential for irrigation in Bangladesh. MSc. 
Dissertation. Asian Institute of Technology, Bangkok, Thailand. 
Yasmin, R. (2008). Groundwater Modeling of the North-Eastern Part of Barind Tract for its 
Sustainable Development and Management, Bangladesh. Asian Journal of Information and 
Technology. 7(5):218-225. 
Zimmermann, E. (2006). Bayesian approach to daily rainfall modelling to estimate monthly net    
    infiltration using the Thornthwaite water budget and curve number methods. Hydrogeol. J., 14:   
   648-656. 
 
 
768 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
EFFECTS OF CAPPING SYSTEM ON COMPRESSIVE STRENGTH OF CONCRETE 
 
 
Sushil Kumar Das1, Sajal Kumar Adhikary1, Abu Zakir Morshed1, Md. Mosaddek Hossain 
Mridha2 and Md. Giash Uddin2 
 
 
ABSTRACT: This study focused on the effects of capping systems on the compressive strength 
of concrete. The investigated capping systems were ground ends, bonded caps (sulfur mortar, 
neat cement paste) and unbonded pads (rubber pads, steel plate). Low strength concrete with 
Portland composite cement was used in this research work. The sulfur mortar produced the 
highest compressive strength where as rubber pads produced the lowest compressive strength. 
The variation of strength between sulfur mortar and other capping systems, as investigated here, 
was 1% to 23% for 6-inch dia. cylinder and 1% to 21% for 4-inch dia. cylinder. The ground ends 
capping systems can be used efficiently if the end surface of the cylinder is prepared perfectly 
plane and perpendicular to the axis of the cylinder. In addition, 4-inch dia. cylinders produced 4% 
to 16% more strength than 6-inch dia. cylinders. 
 
Keywords: Capping, Compressive strength, Rubber pad, Steel plate, Composite cement 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
To produce accurate compressive strength test results, the condition of concrete cylinders must 
meet certain specifications. These specifications deal, primarily, with the end conditions of the 
cylinders and include requirements for perpendicularity of the ends with respect to the cylinder 
axis and flatness of the end surface. The test specimens prepared under field conditions likely do 
not meet these requirements, so some kind of end preparation becomes necessary, otherwise 
under such circumstances, stress concentration are introduced and the apparent strength of the 
concrete is reduced.  
   Various methods are available to prepare the end surfaces of the test cylinders; they range 
from grinding the ends to applying bonded caps such as neat cement paste and sulfur based 
compounds, and more recently unbonded pads such as neoprene pads confined by a rigid steel or 
aluminum ring. 
   The standard capping method in the 1920s was neat cement paste. Gonnerman (1924) 
investigated alternatives to this method. The methods he studied included ground ends, bonding 
caps and alternative unbonded sheet materials were also investigated, but they produced lower 
strengths. Purrington and McCormick (1926) investigated a sand cushion method where sand was 
                                                        
1Assistant Professor, Department of Civil Engineering, KUET, Khulna, Bangladesh.  
2Graduate Student, Department of Civil Engineering, KUET, Khulna, Bangladesh. 
Contact Email: sajaladhikary@yahoo.com 
769 
 
placed inside a confining ring with a diameter of 6½ inch. Their comparative studies reported that 
the strength obtained with this method was comparable to cylinders with cement paste caps. 
Freeman (1930) reported that sulfur mortar material produced better results than other types of 
capping systems. He used a horizontal capping device while the current practice uses a vertical 
device. Carasquillo and Carrasquillo (1987) compared two systems of unbonded pads and a high 
strength sulfur mortar. They found that the use of unbonded caps could provide a cleaner, safer, 
and cost effective alternative to sulfur mortar for capping concrete cylinders. Other literatures on 
capping systems can be found on (ASTM C617, 2003; Richardson, 1990; Werner, 1958). 
   In Bangladesh, mainly sulfur mortar is used as capping material. However, other capping 
systems also can be practiced as discussed above in the literature. The objective of this study was 
to evaluate the effects of capping system on compressive strength of concrete. Since the current 
construction specifications are moving towards high-performance and high-strength concrete, a 
better understanding of how the capping systems affect the tests results is needed. This study will 
help in understanding which capping systems will provide the best representation of the actual 
strength of concrete being used in a particular project. 
 
2. Methods and Materials 
 
2.1. Materials 
 
2.1.1. Cement 
The cement used in this research is Portland Composite Cement, whose chemical composition in 
percentages by mass of the constituent oxides, are shown in Table 1. The mechanical and some 
physical properties are also shown on the same Table. 
 
Table 1 Properties of Portland Composite Cement CEM-II/A-M 
Chemical composition (%) Physical properties Compressive strength (Mpa) 
SiO2 23.99 Specific gravity 3.04 2 days 24.2 
Al2O3 6.43 Initial setting time (h:min.) 2:25 7 days 39.7 
Fe2O3 3.49 Final setting time (h:min.) 3:50 28 days 51.7 
CaO 56.79 Volume expansion (mm) 2.00   
MgO 0.69 Specific surface (m2/kg) 356   
Na2O 0.26     
K2O 1.06     
SO3 2.18     
Cl- 0.017     
Loss on ignition 2.16     
Insoluble residue 6.20     
Free CaO (%) 1.60     
 
2.1.2. Aggregates 
The fine aggregates used are river sand with fineness modulus of 2.70, specific gravity of 2.64 
and absorption capacity of 3.85%. The coarse aggregates used are crushed brick chips with 
nominal maximum size of 3/4 inch, specific gravity of 1.74 and absorption capacity of 14.20%, 
tested according to ASTM C127. A well-graded curve, shown in Figure 1, was maintained for 
uniform distribution of various size fractions for all of the concrete mixes. 
770 
 
0
20
40
60
80
100
0.1110100
Sieve Size (mm)
%
 F
in
er
Figure 1 Grain size distribution of brick-chips  
2.1.3. Mix proportions 
Cement = 389 kg. /m3 
Sand = 778 kg. /m3  
Coarse aggregates = 1556 kg. /m3 
Water-cement ratio by weight = 50% 
 
2.2. Experimental procedures 
 
An arbitrary concrete mix proportion was used in 
this research work. Cylindrical specimens 6"x12" 
and 4"x12" were used to determine the 
compressive strength of concrete. For each type 
of capping materials, cylinder size and testing 
age, three samples were used. The total amount 
of water for concreting was calculated by estimating the field adjustment of coarse aggregate and 
fine aggregate. After 24 hours, the samples were demoulded and provided curing for the certain 
periods of time. Finally, after a specified length of time for a specific capping material, the 
samples were tested to determine the compressive strength of the concrete. Then test results were 
analyzed. 
 
2.3. Capping systems 
 
In this study, we used thee capping systems, which are discussed below. 
 
2.3.1. Ground ends 
The ends of the cylinders were made plane and perpendicular to the axis of the cylinder by 
manually as perfect as possible. 
 
2.3.2. Bonded caps (Sulfur mortar, Cement paste) 
Sulfur mortar used in this project was as per standard specifications ASTM C 617. It was 
collected from the Strength of Material laboratory of Civil Engineering Department, KUET. 
Cement paste was prepared from Portland Composite Cement. Its thickness was maintained ¼ 
inch as far as possible by manually. The cylinders were tested after one day of placing the cement 
paste over it for the curing purposes of the cement paste. 
 
2.3.3. Unbonded pads (Rubber pads, Steel plate) 
Rubber pads were collected from local market whose thickness was ¼ inch. Steel plates were 
collected from the Strength of Material laboratory of Civil Engineering Department, KUET. 
Thickness of these steel plates was also ¼ inch. 
 
 
3. Results and Discussion 
 
The results of compressive strength performed on 6 inch and 4 inch dia. cylindrical specimens 
have been summarized on Table 2. Compressive strength tests were performed on 7, 28 and 90 
days age for each type of capping materials and the average strength of three cylinders for each 
testing age has been presented here. Table 2 shows that small sized cylinders produced better 
771 
 
strength compared to big sized cylinder where 4 inch dia. cylinder produced 4% to 16% more 
strength than 6 inch dia. cylinder. 
 
Table 2 Compressive strength of concrete in 6 inch and 4 inch dia. cylinder 
 
Strength (psi) 
7 Days 28 Days 90 Days Capping 
Materials 6" 
dia. 
4" 
dia. 
Variation 
(%) 
6" 
dia. 
4" 
dia. 
Variation 
(%) 
6" 
dia. 
4" 
dia. 
Variation 
(%) 
Sulfur 
mortar 
1640 1990 18 2383 2601 8 3822 4061 6 
Cement 
paste 
1415 1645 14 2005 2282 12 3232 3424 6 
Rubber 
pad 
1345 1566 14 1828 2123 14 3008 3211 6 
Steel 
plate 
1510 1752 14 2265 2415 6 3326 3556 6 
Without 
capping 
1522 1645 7 2265 2574 12 3774 3928 4 
 
Table 3 and Table 4 show that sulfur mortar produces better compressive strength than other 
capping materials. The variation of compressive strength between sulfur mortar and other 
capping systems as investigated in this research work was 1% to 23% for 6 inch dia. cylinder and 
1% to 21% for 4 inch dia. cylinder. The rubber pad capping had the highest variation in strength 
compared to the sulfur mortar capping whereas without capping system had lowest variation in 
strength. 
 
Table 3 Comparison of strength between sulfur mortar (SM) capping and other capping 
materials in case of 6 inch dia. cylinder 
 
Compressive Strength (psi) 
7 Days 28 Days 90 Days Capping 
Materials 
 
SM Variation (%)  SM 
Variation 
(%)  SM 
Variation 
(%) 
Cement 
Paste 1415 14 2005 16 3232 15 
Rubber 
Pad 1345 18 1828 23 3008 21 
Steel 
Plate 1510 8 2265 5 3326 13 
Without 
Capping 1522 
1640 
7 2265 
2383 
5 3774 
3822 
1 
 
772 
 
Table 4 Comparison of strength between sulfur mortar (SM) capping and other capping 
materials in case of 4 inch dia. cylinder 
Compressive Strength (psi) 
7 Days 28 Days 90 Days Capping 
Materials 
 
SM Variation (%)  SM 
Variation 
(%)  SM 
Variation 
(%) 
Cement 
Paste 1645 17 2282 12 3424 16 
Rubber 
Pad 1556 21 2123 18 3211 21 
Steel 
Plate 1752 12 2415 7 3556 12 
Without 
Capping 1645 
1990 
17 2574 
2601 
1 3928 
4061 
3 
 
Figure 2 shows clearly sulfur mortar produces better strength where as rubber pad produces lower 
strength. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4. Conclusions 
 
This investigation focused on evaluating commonly used capping systems for testing the 
compressive strength of concrete cylinders. The findings of this study will help the testing-
laboratories, determining which system will provide consistent results for compressive strength 
of concrete. The bonded caps produce uniform and better compressive strength than the other 
capping systems. The rubber pad capping had the highest variation in strength compared to the 
sulfur mortar capping whereas without capping system had lowest variation in strength. The 
ground ends capping systems can be used efficiently if the end surface of the cylinder is prepared 
perfectly plane and perpendicular to the axis of the cylinder. Moreover, small sized 4 inch dia. 
Strength of Cylinder (6" dia.)
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
4500
0 20 40 60 80 100
Age (days)
St
re
ng
th
 (p
si
) Cement
Paste
Rubber Pad
Steel Plate
Sulfur Mortar
Without
Capping
Strength of Cylinder (4"dia)
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
4500
0 20 40 60 80 100
Age (days)
S
tre
ng
th
 (p
si
) CementPaste
Rubber Pad
Steel Plate
Sulfur
Mortar
Without
Capping
Figure 2 Compressive strength of concrete cylinder for different capping materials (a) in case 
of 6 inch dia. cylinder and (b) in case of 4 inch dia. cylinder 
(a) (b) 
773 
 
cylinders produced better strength compared to big sized 6 inch dia. Cylinders. 
 
 
References 
 
ASTM C617 (2003). Standard Practice for Capping Cylindrical Concrete Specimens, Annual 
Book of ASTM Standards, ASTM International 4.02. 
Carrasquillo, P.M. and Carrasquillo, R.L. (1987). Effect of using unbonded capping systems on 
the compressive strength of concrete cylinders, ACI Materials Journal, 85(3). 
Freeman, P.J. (1930). Method of capping concrete cylinders using sulfur compound, ASTM 
proceedings, 30: 518-520. 
Gonnerman, H.F. (1924). Effect of end conditions of cylinder on compression strength of 
concrete, American Society of Testing and Materials, 24(2): 1036-1065. 
Purrington, W.F. and McCormick, J. (1926). A simple device to obviate capping of concrete 
specimens, ASTM proceedings, 26: 488-492. 
Richardson, D.N. (1990). Effects of testing variables on the comparison of neoprene pad and 
sulfur mortar-capped concrete test cylinders, ACI Materials Journal, 87(5): 489-495. 
Werner, G. (1958). The effect of type of capping material on the compressive strength of concrete 
cylinders, ASTM proceedings, 58: 1166-1186. 
 
 
 
774 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
EFFECTS OF VARIOUS TYPES OF CURING ON THE STRENGTH OF CONCRETE 
MADE FROM MANUALLY MOLDED BRICK AGGREGATES 
 
 
Abu Zakir Morshed1, Sushil Kumar Das1, Sajal Kumar Adhikary1, Abdur Rahman2 and 
Touhidur Rahman2 
 
 
ABSTRACT: This investigation aims at evaluating the strength properties of concrete, where 
manually molded brick chips were used as the coarse aggregate, adopting different types of 
curing conditions, such as normal ponding curing, one-day and three-days delay curing, self 
curing, natural weathering curing and air dry curing. The strength gaining of concrete depends on 
proper hydration, where sufficient water ensures proper hydration. The cementitious material 
makes bonding with filler material by the help of moisture. In case of normal ponding curing, the 
concrete gets sufficient moisture for hydration. The compressive strength and moisture content of 
concrete were tested after 7, 28 and 90 days for different types of curing condition. The variation 
of compressive strength was compared, and it was found that at normal ponding curing, the 
strength gaining rate of concrete was higher compared to others. The compressive strength of 
concrete for all other types of curing are significantly affected, especially, if the curing is delayed 
initially after demoulding from formworks. 
 
Keywords: Curing, Manually molded brick, Self-curing, Compressive strength of Concrete 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Curing is the name given to the procedures used for promoting the hydration of cement and other 
binding agents introduced into the concrete mix to facilitate the development of its strength and 
the reduction in its porosity and permeability (Rostam and Matthews, 2009). This is achieved by 
the control of the temperature of the concrete and the movement of moisture into or out of the 
concrete. In order to obtain good concrete, the placing of an appropriate mix must be followed by 
curing in a suitable environment during the early stages of hardening. More specially, the object 
of curing is to keep concrete saturated or as nearly saturated as possible until the originally water-
filled space within the fresh cement paste has been filled to the extent desired by the products of 
the hydration of the cement and the associated binding agents introduced into the concrete mix. 
This might be achieved by ensuring that moisture losses, such as evaporation from exposed 
concrete surfaces, are kept low or that such surfaces are kept permanently wet. In case of site 
concrete, active curing almost always stops long before the maximum degree of hydration has 
                                                        
1Assistant Professor, Department of Civil Engineering, KUET, Khulna, Bangladesh.  
2Graduate Student, Department of Civil Engineering, KUET, Khulna, Bangladesh. 
Contact Email: sajaladhikary@yahoo.com 
775 
 
occurred (Neville, 1995). 
   It follows that, for hydration to continue, the relative humidity inside the concrete has to be 
maintained at least 80 percent (Patel et al, 1988; Powers and Brownyard, 1947). If the relative 
humidity of the ambient air is at that high, there will be little movement of water between the 
concrete and the ambient air, and no active curing is needed to ensure continuing hydration. 
Strictly speaking, the preceding statement is valid only if no other factors intervene, e.g. there is 
no wind, there is no difference in temperature between the concrete and the air, and if the 
concrete is not exposed to solar radiation. In practice, therefore, active curing is unnecessary only 
in a very humid climate with a steady temperature. It is important to note that in many parts of 
the world the relative humidity falls below 80 percent sometimes during the day so that the belief 
in 'natural curing', just because the weather is wet, is unfounded. Guidance of curing can be found 
on Concrete Society (2008); HETEK (1997a, 1997b); Ramezanianpour and Malhotra (1995); 
Price (1951) and RILEM (1994). 
   Different curing procedures are practiced in the construction field; some are deviated from the 
standard curing procedure due to lack of knowledge or resource limitations. The objective of this 
study was to compare the effects of various types of curing on the strength of concrete in the 
context of Bangladesh 
 
 
2. Methods and Materials 
 
2.1. Materials 
 
2.1.1. Cement 
The cement used in this study is ASTM Type-I ordinary Portland cement, whose chemical 
composition in percentages by mass of the constituent oxides, is shown in Table 1. The 
mechanical and some physical properties are also shown on the same Table. 
 
Table 1 Physical, chemical and mechanical properties of Portland cement 
Chemical composition (%) Physical properties Compressive strength (psi) 
SiO2 19.3 Specific gravity 3.15 3 days 2800 
Al2O3 5.6 Initial setting time (min.) 130 7 days 3600 
Fe2O3 3.5 Final setting time (min.) 245 28 days 4400 
CaO 63.6 Volume expansion (mm) 1.00   
MgO 0.9 Specific surface (m2/kg) 352   
Na2O 0.1     
K2O 0.8     
SO3 2.9     
Cl- 0.0     
Loss on ignition 1.8     
Insoluble residue 0.4     
Free CaO (%) 1.2     
 
 
 
776 
 
0
20
40
60
80
100
0.1110100
Sieve Size (mm)
%
 F
in
er
Figure 1 Grain size distribution of brick-chips  
2.1.2. Aggregates 
The fine aggregates used are river sand with 
fineness modulus of 2.63 and absorption capacity 
of 4.02%. The coarse aggregates used are 
crushed brick chips with nominal maximum size 
of ¾ inch and absorption capacity of 16.05%, 
tested according to ASTM C127. A well-graded 
curve, shown in Figure 1, was maintained for 
uniform distribution of various size fractions for 
all of the concrete mixes. 
 
2.1.3. Mix proportions 
Cement = 389 kg. /m3 
Sand = 652 kg. /m3  
Coarse aggregates = 752 kg. /m3 
Water-cement ratio by weight = 50% 
 
2.2. Experimental procedures 
 
An arbitrary concrete mix proportion was used in this research work. Cylindrical specimens, 
6"dia x 12", were used to determine the compressive strength of concrete. For each type of curing 
(discussed in Section 2.3) and testing age (7, 28 and 90 days), three samples were used. The total 
amount of water for concreting was calculated by estimating the field adjustment of coarse 
aggregate and fine aggregate. After 24 hours of initial curing the samples were demoulded and 
provided different curing condition. Finally after a specified length of time for a specific curing 
condition, the samples were tested to determine the compressive strength and corresponding 
moisture content (%). Then test results were analyzed. 
 
2.3. Curing procedures 
 
Several field-investigations on curing practices prevailing in the construction field reveal that 
sometimes concrete curing is adopted carelessly or with ignorance, deviating much from the 
standard curing procedure. In this connection, the authors categorize the following six types of 
curing practices in this research. Figure 2 show three major types of curing procedures. 
 
2.3.1. Normal ponding curing 
In this method, the concrete is sunk into water so that it can imbibe water properly. The surfaces 
of the concrete are continuously in contact with water for a specified length of time. 
 
2.3.2. One-day delay curing 
After demoulding, the samples are kept at natural weathering condition for one day. Then these 
are transferred at normal ponding curing condition. In some construction works, curing is not 
started at proper time. They make delay one day for various unavoidable circumstances. 
 
2.3.3. Three-days delay curing 
After demoulding, the samples are kept at natural weathering condition for three days. Then these 
777 
 
Figure 2 (a) Normal ponding curing (b) Natural weathering curing (c) Self curing 
 
c 
are transferred at normal ponding curing condition. In some cases, three days delay curing is 
practiced for the negligence of works or other purposes. 
 
2.3.4. Self curing 
After demoulding, the samples are packed with polythene paper and stored at laboratory. The 
cylinders are kept approximately air-tight to inhibit moisture movement to and from the 
specimens. 
 
2.3.5. Natural weathering curing 
In this method, after demoulding, the samples are kept in an open surface so that it can be cured 
only by absorbing moisture from the natural weather. 
 
2.3.6. Air dry curing 
After demoulding, the samples are cured for one week at normal ponding. Then these are kept in 
the laboratory at room temperature. This type of curing is practiced due to the improper 
knowledge about concreting, admixtures, bonding etc. For this reason, we included this type of 
curing in our research work. 
 
 
 
 
3. Results and Discussion 
 
3.1. Effects on compressive strength of concrete 
 
Table 2 shows the results of compressive strength performed on 6-inch dia cylindrical specimens. 
Compressive strength tests were performed on 7, 28 and 90 days ages for each type of curing 
conditions, and the average strength of three cylinders for each testing age has been presented 
here. As shown in Table 2, the strength gaining rate at normal ponding curing was higher than 
other types of curing since the concrete can absorb sufficient amount of moisture for hydration of 
the cement. The 28 days strength was found to vary between 3,020psi to 3,400psi. In air dry 
curing, the strength gaining rate was comparatively close to normal ponding curing because the 
concrete got sufficient moisture during the first week. Among other curing procedures, one-day 
delay curing also was closer to normal ponding curing as it only faces the lack of moisture on the 
first day. 
778 
 
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
4500
0 50 100
Age in days
C
om
pr
es
si
ve
 s
tr
en
gt
h 
in
 
ps
i
Normal ponding curing
One day delay curing
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
4500
0 50 100
Age in days
 C
om
pr
es
si
ve
 s
tr
en
gt
h 
in
 
ps
i
Normal ponding curing
Three days delay curing
Figure 3 Normal ponding Vs One-day 
delay curing 
Figure 4 Normal ponding Vs Three-days 
delay curing 
 
Table 2 Compressive strength of concrete 
Curing types Age (days) Avg. compressive strength (psi) Moisture content (%) 
7 2470 13.74 
28 3400 14.00 
Normal ponding 
90 4000 12.96 
7 2310 13.25 
28 3185 13.50 
One-day delay 
90 3900 12.90 
7 2285 12.00 
28 3155 13.00 
Three-days delay 
90 3825 12.30 
7 1810 11.00 
28 3020 10.00 
Self 
90 3820 8.70 
7 1990 6.80 
28 3025 6.20 
Natural weathering 
90 3815 6.53 
7 2470 13.74 
28 3265 8.20 
Air dry 
90 3900 5.09 
 
Considering normal ponding curing as a reference, other methods of curing were compared with 
it as shown in Figure 3 to Figure 7. Figure 3 compares the strength gaining rate between normal 
ponding curing and the curing which was started one day after demoulding and Figure 4 
compares the three days delay curing with the normal ponding curing. From these figures, it is 
obvious that delayed curing affects the compressive strength, since the cement could not have 
enough supply of external moisture for its hydration. For these reasons, both curves remain below 
the normal ponding curing curves. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
779 
 
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
4500
0 50 100
Age in days
C
om
pr
es
si
ve
 s
tr
en
gt
h 
in
 p
si
Normal ponding curing
Self curing
Figure 5 Normal ponding Vs Self curing 
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
4500
0 50 100
Age in days
C
om
pr
es
si
ve
 s
tr
en
gt
h 
in
 
ps
i
Normal ponding curing
Natural weathering curing
Figure 6 Normal ponding Vs Natural 
weathering curing 
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
4500
0 50 100
Age in days
C
om
pr
es
si
ve
 s
tr
en
gt
h 
in
 
ps
i
Normal ponding curing
Air dry curing
Figure 7 Normal ponding Vs Air dry 
curing 
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
28
32
0 20 40 60 80 100
Age (day)
St
re
ng
th
 R
ed
uc
tio
n 
(%
)
1-D delay 3-D delay
Self-curing Natural
Air-dry
Figure 8 Percent strength reduction Vs Time 
with respect to normal ponding curing 
Figure 5 and Figure 6 shows that in self curing and natural weathering curing, proper hydration in 
cement could not occur due to insufficient moisture for which the strength gaining rate is poor. In 
Figure 7 shows that in air dry curing, initially the strength-gaining rate is same as normal ponding 
curing, but it decreases afterwards due to lack of sufficient moisture for hydration. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Strength reduction percentage of concrete with respect to normal ponding curing for various 
types of curing has been normalized and shown in Figure 8. From Figure 8, it is clear that the 
strength reduction rate is very rapid for self curing where moisture movement was inhibited 
approximately by sealing the specimens with polythene papers, and the moisture for hydration 
was collected internally. However, the strength reduction rate for self curing and natural 
weathering curing after 28 days age coincided incidentally. A continuous reduction rate was 
found for one-day delay and three-days delay curing until 90 days age, that is, the initial lacking 
of external moisture has a significant negative effect on the strength properties. 
 
780 
 
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
0 20 40 60 80 100
Age (day)
M
oi
st
ur
e 
C
on
te
nt
 (%
)
1-D delay 3-D delay
Self-curing Natural
Air-dry Ponding
Figure 9 Percent change in moisture 
content of the concrete with time  
3.2. Change in internal moisture content with time 
 
The change in internal moisture content has been 
illustrated in Figure 9. It is observed that for normal 
ponding curing, initial moisture content increases a 
little amount from original position but finally it 
decreases. For one-day and three-days delay curing, 
it shows similar nature as normal ponding curing. 
   For self curing the moisture content initially 
decreases with a higher rate from original position 
and finally decreases at a slower rate, when the 
moisture demand for hydration decrease gradually. 
For air dry curing the moisture content initially 
decreases at a very higher rate but finally the rate 
gets slower. At natural weathering curing, the 
moisture content initially decreases slowly, but 
finally increases very slowly due to weather 
conditions. It should be mentioned herein that a 
complete meteorological data for rainfall and daily 
temperature were counted periodically, but not 
enclosed here, for proper monitoring of natural 
weathering curing process. 
 
 
4. Conclusions 
 
Various curing conditions those are normally practiced at the construction field are studied and 
investigated at the laboratory for concrete composed of ordinary Portland cement and manually 
molded brick-chips. The experimental results show that except the standard curing method, i.e. 
the normal ponding curing, the compressive strength of concrete for all other types of curing are 
significantly affected, especially, if the curing is delayed initially after demoulding from 
formworks. 
 
 
References 
 
Concrete Society (2008). Concrete practice: Good concrete guide 8 Ref. CS164, Concrete Society, 
Camberley. 
HETEK (1997a). Control of early age cracking in concrete, Guidelines Report No.120, Road 
Directorate Denmark, Ministry of Transport. 
HETEK (1997b). Curing, Guidelines Report No. 121, Road Directorate Denmark, Ministry of 
Transport. 
Neville, A.M. (1995). Properties of Concrete, 4th edn, Prentice Hall. 
Patel, R.G., Killoh, D.C., Parrott, L.J. and Gutteridge, W.A. (1988). Influence of curing at 
different relative humidities upon compound reactions and porosity in Portland cement paste, 
Materials and structures, 21(3): 192-197. 
Powers, T.C. and Brownyard, T.L. (1947). Studies of the physical properties of hardened Portland 
781 
 
cement paste, American Concrete Institute, 18(7): 845-857. 
Price, W.H. (1951). Factors influencing concrete strength, American Concrete Institute, 22(6): 
417-432. 
Ramezanianpour, A.A. and Malhotra, V.M. (1995). Effect of curing on the compressive strength, 
resistance to chloride-ion penetration and porosity of concretes incorporating slag, fly ash or 
silica fume, Cement and Concrete Composites, 17(2): 125-133. 
RILEM (1994). Thermal cracking in concrete at early ages, in R. Springenschmid (ed.), Proc. Int. 
Symp. held by RILEM, Munich, October 10-12. 
Rostam, S. and Matthews, S. (2009), Stuctural Concrete: Textbook on Behvior, Design and 
Performance, 2nd edn, vol. 3, International federation for structural concrete (fib), Lausanne, 
Switzerland. 
782 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
ADAPTATION STRATEGIES ON WATER SUPPLY AND SANITATION DUE TO CLIMATE 
CHANGE AT SELECTED COASTAL AREAS OF BANGLADESH 
 
 
Imon Das Gupta1 and Md. Saiful Islam2 
 
 
Abstract: Bangladesh is a south Asian developing country and is prone to a multitude of climate 
related impacts such as tropical cyclones, floods, droughts, storm surges, water logging, salinity, 
erosions etc. Though the cyclones of 1991, 1994, 1998, 2007 and 2009 have created great awareness 
of the need and opportunities to prepare for natural calamities and to reduce vulnerability, the aspects 
of climate change have made the situation more critical and have created a greater need for 
adaptation strategies. The coastal area is affected by severe weather conditions which hamper the 
existing water supply and sanitation facilities. The sanitary collection, transportation, treatment and 
disposal of human waste promote health; improve the quality of the environment and thus, the 
quality of life in a community.  In coastal areas, human waste is directly disposed of into the surface 
water such as rivers, canals and sea or in the mudflat to await the tide. These surface waters, 
however, are often the communities' sources of food, and water for drinking, domestic and personal 
cleaning. Present condition of sanitation shows that contaminated water and human wastes are major 
factors in the transmission of diseases in coastal regions of Bangladesh. A field survey was 
conducted on 120 families in 3 unions of Shyamnagar Upazila of Satkhira District in the Division of 
Khulna namely Burigoalini, Munshigonja and Gabura and the required primary data was collected 
from housewives or any other persons of the family to estimate the change in water supply and 
sanitation due to climate change. By testing the water quality parameters like total coliform (TC), 
faecal coliform (FC), turbidity, color, pH, and salinity of the collected samples we were able to 
decided that quality of the water is below standard to address the existing challenges. This study 
includes an outlook of remedial measurements that can be considered for sustaining the water supply 
and sanitation due to climate change to fulfill the demand of the community in coastal belt of 
Bangladesh. This thesis aims to contribute to the process of adaptation strategies on water supply and 
sanitation for the low-income coastal and waterfront communities. 
 
 
 
                                                             
1 Under Graduate Student, Department of Civil Engineering, KUET, Khulna, Bangladesh. 
2 Professor, Department of Civil Engineering, KUET, Khulna, Bangladesh. 
783 
 
1. Introduction 
 
The Bangladesh coast is the most hazardous coast in the world in terms of the number of people who 
suffer from various types of environmental hazards every year. It has been revealed from a number of 
studies and reports that Bangladesh is one of the countries in the world that may become most 
severely affected by ongoing and future impacts from climate change related hazards.    A huge 
portion of the population is displaced, both temporarily and permanently, due to natural calamities. In 
addition, recent of major cyclones like Sidr, 2007, and Aila, 2009, may be an indication of more 
occurrences frequent and severe climatic catastrophes. But, there is still a lack of awareness among 
the public about climate change and also, little consensus among the concerned bodies about the 
existence and the types of environmental effects of climate change and the numbers of environmental 
displacements. Lack of coordination among the organizations makes the situation even more difficult 
to tackle. The target group of the Water Supply and Sanitation is the population of the 303 unions of 
31 upazillas. 
     It is very essential to have sufficient water supply and sanitation in all over the world. In 
Bangladesh most of the people live in coastal area are affected with salinity problem and scarce pure 
drinking water. In every year many people die due to various types of water borne diseases like 
diarrhea, cholera etc. which is certainly related with the insufficient sanitation system. In coastal 
areas of Bangladesh which are frequently affected by various natural calamities, there is no sufficient 
water supply or sanitation system. Thus they are always in want of pure water for drinking, cooking, 
washing etc. Though Public Health Department and different NGOs install deep and shallow 
tubewells, shallow shrouded tubewells (SST), very shallow shrouded tubewells (VSST), pond sand 
filter (PSF) and rainwater harvesting equipments, it seems inadequate to meet their need.  
     Water supply systems in Bangladesh are heavy dependent on single, ground water source. 
Groundwater consists of excessive concentrations of arsenic, iron, manganese and salinity. 
Alternative water supply options include shallow hand pump tubewells, deep tubewells, Very 
Shallow Shrouded TubeWells (VSST), Tara pumps, Pond Sand Filters (PSF) and Rainwater 
Harvesting Units. The major water supply issue in coastal areas is high salinity. The upper aquifers 
are mostly saline. In most areas deep tubewells (though more expensive) provide fresh water. Other 
technologies include PSF, SST, VSST & RWH. Coverage is low compared to the rest of the country. 
The western part of the coastal belt is by far the most under-served area. Water and Sanitation 
infrastructures are vulnerable to cyclones and storm surges. There  are  no  specific  actions  on  
strategies  regarding  safe  water supply and  sanitation facilities in  the  coastal   areas.  Thus, strong 
policy advocacy is required to ensure safe water supply and hygienic sanitation facilities in the 
disaster affected areas. In Bangladesh, natural disasters occur at a regular interval. Each year, a 
significant number of Water and Sanitary facilities are built in Bangladesh without taking into 
account the impact of natural disasters. As a result, a large number of these facilities are destroyed by 
floods and cyclones. Consequently, people  living  in  the  affected  areas suffer  from deprivation  of  
the water supply and sanitation  facilities  and  become  vulnerable  to  several health risks. 
 
 
784 
 
 
2. The Potential impacts of climate Change on Bangladesh 
 
Climate change is a burning issue in this time. Due to global warming, human made environmental 
pollution and nonstop increasing of atmospheric CO2 levels make a significant alternation in earth’s 
climate and this climatic change turns to and posses various natural calamities which are directly 
involved in degradation of water supply and sanitation system of a society. Bangladeshi communities 
are struggling to cope with current climatic conditions and the impacts of extreme climatic events on 
livelihoods and food scarcity, while Bangladesh is considered to be one of the most vulnerable 
countries to climate change. The adverse impacts of climate change are exposed geographically 
because of its location in the tropics in the delta of three of the world’s rivers and its flat low lying 
deltaic topography. 
      At the same time, due to the poverty the country’s adaptive capacity is low.  
Water is where many of the impacts of climate change will be felt first and most acutely.  Das and 
Radhakrishna (1991) documented a rise in mean sea level in Bay of Bengal of 2.5 mm per year since 
the 1950s. An additional increase of 15 to 38 cm is expected by 2050 (Kumar et al., 2002).  So, 
protection of low lying coastal areas is important because elevated sea levels could lead to large scale 
intrusion of salt water into surface and groundwater systems. Sea level rise may also result in 
drainage congestion and water logging in the delta during high flow periods of rivers.  Finally, 
alternation in flow dynamics as a result of sea level rise could result in the erosion of river and 
estuary banks. Finally when permanent displacement of people from the coast occurs, it poses the 
worst scenario. 
 
3. Study Area 
 
The field study is related with the present situation of water supply and sanitation in coastal area. For 
this purpose, Shyamnagar Upazila of Satkhira District in the Division of Khulna was selected.  The 
study area was greatly affceted in recent cyclones occurred in bangladesh; Sidr 2007 and Aila 2009. 
After these two frequent natural disaster the sanitation system, water suply system, agricultural 
system was ruied and the economy, cultural life of the community was also massively affected. 
Shyamnagar Upazila is bounded by Kaliganj (Satkhira) and Assasuni upazilas on the north, 
Sundarbans and Bay of Bengal on the south, Koyra and Assasuni upazilas on the east, West Bengal 
of India on the west. The main rivers here are: Raymangal, Kalindi, Kobadak, Mother Kholpetua, 
Arpangachia, Malancha Hariabhanga and Chuna. South Talpatti Island at the estuary of the 
Hariabhanga is notable places. Shyamnagar has 12 Unions/Wards, 127 Mauzas/Mahallas, and 216 
villages. The unions are 1. Vurulia. 2. Shyamnagar Sadar. 3. Munsigong. 4. Horinagor. 5. Koikhali. 
6. Ramjan nagor. 7. Nurnagar. 8. Chondipur. 9. Isharipur 10. Atulia. 11. Podmopukur. 12. Kshimari. 
The area has a population of 1949899. Males constitute are 1004415 of the population, and females 
8945024. This Upazila's eighteen up population is 132516. Shyamnagar has an average literacy rate 
of 53.32% (7+ years).  
 
785 
 
4. Methodology 
 
An elaborated literature study on the related topic was carried out for the better understanding and 
representation of the problem. To identify the technical and social problems of existing water supply 
and sanitation situation a questioner survey was conducted among the inhabitants the selected area. 
Pictorial references of the existing water supply and sanitation facilities were also taken. 
Raw water and filtered water samples were collected from selected PSFs that were tested in the 
laboratory for water quality investigation. Important parameters like total coliform (TC), faecal 
coliform (FC), turbidity, salinity and color were tested for raw water and treated water. After that, 
suitable adoptive measurements are suggested considering the available facts like available source of 
water, production cost, accessibility etc. 
 
5. Field Investigation 
 
Pond sand Filters (PSF), Shallow Tubewells, Deep Tubewells, Very Shallow Shrouded Tubewells 
(VSST) and Shallow Shrouded Tubewellls (SST) are being used as water supply options, mainly in 
the southern fringes of Khulna, Shatkhira, Bagerhat, Noakhali, Pirojpur and Barguna districts. In this 
region, the ground water is mostly saline and suitable fresh water sources are not available in plenty. 
For this reason the need of alternative water supply sources arises. The water supply and sanitation 
facilities are endangered by natural disasters like cyclones, storm surges from the sea, coastal erosion 
and flooding. 
A preliminary investigation was performed on the present status of existing water supply and 
sanitation facilities in Shyamnagar, Shatkhira in 2010. It was clear in the preliminary investigation 
the water supply facilities do not meet the demand and the condition of existing water supply and 
sanitation facilities are also poor. Based on the results of preliminary investigation, a detailed survey 
through questionnaire was conducted in an effort to better understand the situation. 
 
5.1 Existing Water Supply Facilities 
 
According to the recent field report (DPHE, Shyamnagar upazila, Shatkhira District, Year 2010) 
various types of water supply mechanisms are installed in the affected zone which include deep and 
shallow tubewells, shallow shrouded tubewells (SST), very shallow shrouded tubewells (VSST), 
pond sand filter (PSF) and rainwater harvesting equipments etc. The present situation is represented 
in bellow: 
 
 out of 2459 all type of Tubewells – 2085 (84.79%) are functioning 
 out of  316 Shallow Tubewell 213 (67.41%) are functioning 
 out of 917 -  No. 6 Deep Tubewell -  907 (98.91%) are functioning 
 out of  441 Very Shallow Shrouded Tubewells (VSST) - 397 (90.02%) are functioning 
 out of  293 Shallow Shrouded Tubewells (SST) – 278 (94.88%) are functioning 
 out of  37 Rain water Harvesting Unit  -37 (100%) are functioning 
786 
 
 out of 455 Pond Sand Filter – 253 (55.60%) are functioning 
The number of shallow tubewell, deep tubewells (DT), shallow shrouded tubewells (SST), very 
shallow shrouded tubewells (VSST), rainwater harvesting unit (RWH) - functioning, closed and the 
total number of relevant facilities is shown in the figure 2. It can be seen that the deep tubewells and 
PSFs are the main two sources of drinking water. 
 
0
200
400
600
800
1000
SST DT VSST SST RWH PSF
Total
Working
Closed
 
Figure 1 Bar diagram showing existing water supply facilities 
 
5.2 Impurity Removal Efficiency of the existing PSFs 
 
Bacteriological quality of water is of major concern for surface water treatment. Drinking water 
should be free from any pathogenic organisms, which are often difficult to detect analytically. Even 
clear and pleasant water may carry harmful disease-causing micro-organisms. However, the removal 
efficiency is greatly dependent on the pollution load of raw water. The turbidity of the samples were 
analyzed by turbid meter and total and faecal coliform was tests were carried out by coliform 
membrane procedure in Environmental laboratory of KUET. Analysis was also performed for color, 
pH and salinity of the sample. Table 1 shows the test results of the total coliform, fecal 
coliform,turbidity and color reduction of the PSFs. Tests were also performed for pH  and salinity 
which are also important water quality parameter. 
787 
 
   
Plate 1 Raw water source (pond) 
of the PSF 
 
Plate 2 Abandoned PSF at 
Munshiganja Union in 
Shyamnagar Upazila 
 
Plate 3 Water collection from 
a functioning PSF in 
Burigoalini Union of 
Shyamnagar Upazila 
 
Table 1 Total Coliform (TC), Faecal Coliform (FC), turbidity, colour pH and salinity of raw water 
and treated water sample 
 
TC/100ml FC/100ml Turbidity 
(NTU) 
Colour 
(TCU) 
pH Salinity, 
mg/L 
Seria
l No. 
Location 
RW T
W 
RW T
W 
RW TW R
W 
T
W 
RW TW RW T
W 
01 Burigoalini 130 17 70 4 17.
6 
3.9
2 
268 89 7.3
2 
7.3
1 
230 200 
02 Burigoalini 938 100 415 35 7.7
9 
4.1
8 
83 21 8.0
6 
7.8
8 
642 469 
03 Burigoalini 680 56 195 8 8.9
7 
1.3
2 
174 12 7.2
2 
7.3
7 
150 80 
04 Munshigonj
a 
192
0 
170 104
0 
10 16 5.8
4 
254 49 7.4 7.2
1 
700 570 
788 
 
05 Munshigonj
a 
152
0 
350 116
0 
160 13.
3 
1.6 39 4 8.5 8.2
6 
298 265 
06 Munshigonj
a 
154
0 
350 114
0 
250 43.
4 
11.
8 
960 62 7.2
8 
7.6
7 
145
0 
50 
 
Laboratory investigation has shown that the turbidity and color removal efficiency is mostly 
acceptable but the total and fecal coliforms are not removed efficiently. The following figure 
represents the TC, FC, turbidity and color removal efficiency of the PSFs: 
 
0
20
40
60
80
100
Sample 1 Sample 2 Sample 3 Sample 4 Sample 5
% of TC removed
% of FC removed
% of turbidity removed
 
 
Figure 2 Bar diagram showing efficiency of existing PSF 
 
5.3 Field survey 
 
The field survey was conducted on 120 families in 3 unions namely Burigoalini, Munshigonja and 
Gabura. Entering the house, it was tried to reach the head of the family first, in the absence of the 
head, the required data was collected from housewife or any other person of the family. Most of the 
people in the site are illiterate. So it was very difficult to clarify the objectives of the survey to them. 
The summery of the questionnaire is given in the table: 2 
 
Table 2 Result of Questionnaire 
 
Total Number of Family 120 
Population 755 
No of families using tubewell as 51 
789 
 
drinking source 
No of families using PSF as drinking 
source 70 
No of families using pond as drinking 
source 38 
No of families using  rain water 
harvesting unit as drinking source 17 
Drinking water required 3486 litre 
Avg. Drinking water required 4.62 lpcd 
Water required for cooking 5100 litre 
Avg. Water required for cooking 6.75 lpcd 
No of families using  pit latrines or 
sanitary latrines 52 
Families practicing open defecation 124 
 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Tube well PSF POND RWH
 
 
Figure 3 Sources of drinking water 
 
It was found that the local people are depending upon multiple sources of drinking water rather than 
one. They try to collect water from whatever sources they can get their hands onto as long as the 
water is not saline. They are not concerned of the waterborne diseases that may be caused from 
drinking raw water from the ponds. The figure 4 represents the different sources of water used based 
on the questionnaire. 
 
790 
 
  
Plate 4 Present condition scenario of sanitation system 
 
Sanitation practice has always been major concern in this coastal part of Bangladesh. People being 
illiterate, generally don’t know about the consequences of open defecation. The condition has been 
worsen after the recent visit of AILA in 2009. Most of the sanitation facilities were washed away 
during the storm surge. The NGO’s and local governments have repaired the destroyed latrines and 
provided some new ones but that is not up to the requirement. 
Use sanitary
latrine43.33% 
56.67% 
 
 
Figure 4 Present condition of sanitation 
The figure 4 based on questionnaire shows the present practice of sanitary latrine. Over 56% of the 
people under survey do not have access to sanitary latrines whereas the national goal is to reach 
100% sanitation. 
 
791 
 
6. Findings of the Field Investigation 
 
On the basis of obtained data, analysis of collected sample and field survey, the following major 
observations can be drawn 
 Coverage of safe drinking water and sanitation is low compared to the rest of the country. This 
part of the coastal belt is by far the most under-served area. 
 People are being forced to use raw water from ponds due to unavailability of safe and potable 
water. 
 Most of the sanitary latrines were destroyed during AILA. Open defecation is being practiced.  
 Water and Sanitation infrastructures are vulnerable to cyclones and storm surges. 
 Salt water intrusion is a major problem. The upper aquifers are mostly saline.  
 The pond banks were not well protected. So the outside impure water could easily enter into the 
ponds during AILA. 
 In most areas deep tubewells (though more expensive) provide fresh water. Other technologies 
include PSF, SST,VSST & RWH 
 46.40% of the PSFs and 32.39% of the shallow tubewells took damage during AILA. 
 Surface water has poor bacteriological quality. 
 The values of alkalinity, hardness, salinity, turbidity, TC, FC were found very high. This is 
because of AILA was occurred a year before of the visit at the southern region. 
 The impurity removal efficiency of the existing PSFs are not adequate. The filtered water quality 
do not meet health standard. 
 
7. Adaptation Strategies 
 
The goal of adaptation strategies is to reduce the country’s vulnerability to the impacts conveyed 
through water in a way that is sustainable from the technical, economical, environmental and social 
perspectives. The intervention areas water resources planning and management, including flood and 
drought risk and water quality and also water services. National Strategy for Climate Change 
Adaptation should contain the following objectives:  
 Information and knowledge  
 Reduce vulnerability  
 Enhance response capability  
 Raise public awareness  
 Foster public participation 
 International cooperation 
 
 
 
792 
 
7.1 Adaptation options in principle 
 
Table 3 summarizes some adaptation options for water resources, designed to ensure supplies during 
average and drought conditions. Each option, whether supply-side or demand-side, has a range of 
advantages and disadvantages, and the relative benefits of different options depend on local 
circumstances. 
 
Table 3 Some adaptation options for water supply and demand 
 
Supply side Demand side 
Prospecting and extraction of groundwater Improvement of water use efficiency by recycling 
Increasing storage capacity by building 
reservoirs and dams 
Reduction in water demand for irrigation by changing 
the cropping calendar, crop mix, irrigation method, 
and area planted 
Desalination of sea water Reduction in water demand for irrigation by 
importing agricultural products, i.e., virtual water  
Expansion of rain water storage Promotion of indigenous practices for sustainable 
water use 
Water transfer Expanded use of economic incentives including 
metering and pricing to encourage water conservation  
 
However, supply-side options, involving increases in storage capacity or abstraction from water 
courses, tend to have adverse environmental    consequences. Decreasing water demand in a country 
by importing virtual water (Allan, 1998;  Oki et al., 2003b),  in  particular in the form of agricultural 
products, may be an adaptation option only under certain economic and social conditions (e.g., 
financial means to pay for imports, alternative income possibilities for farmers). Information, 
including basic geophysical, hydro-meteorological, and environmental data as well as information 
about social, cultural and economic values and ecosystem needs, is also critically important for 
effective adaptation. 
 
 
 
 
793 
 
7.2 Key adaptation principles 
 
 Assume an integrated and long term vision. 
 Invest in research and knowledge and climate proof sector policies. 
 Decide early and review frequently and adopt flexible or low regret alternatives. 
 Choose cost-effective and proportional solutions. 
 Mainstream adaptation policies into existing water management practice. 
 Seize the moment by taking this opportunity to improve existing infrastructures and 
management system. 
 
7.3 Adaptation options available for management of coastal flooding 
 
Bangladesh is already vulnerable to coastal flooding, and this vulnerability will increase under 
climate change due to a combination of factors. Bangladesh already employs coastal embankment 
towards management of coastal flooding, particularly when it is caused by high tides and storm 
surges. However, inadequate drainage infrastructure along an embankment can be counter-
productive, and could interact with several aspects of climate change to produce a cascade of adverse 
consequences that could in fact enhance the vulnerability of the coastal areas in Bangladesh.   
 A first order adaptation to climate change would therefore to build or maintain appropriate 
drainage infrastructure along coastal embankments. In fact flow regulators had already been 
incorporated in the design of existing embankments. However, in many cases the required 
number of regulators was not built as per design. In other cases, even if the regulators were 
built, they lacked proper maintenance and consequently failed to serve their intended 
purpose. Therefore building of new drainage regulators along coastal embankments needs to 
be complemented by an assessment of the need for refurbishing existing regulators, followed 
by their periodic monitoring and maintenance. The participation of local communities would 
be critical for the effective monitoring and maintenance of coastal embankments and flow 
regulators. The National Water Policy (MOWR 1999) has given a clear mandate for the 
formation of associations of water users and water managers, and the participation of these 
local level organizations at all levels of planning and execution of projects, and more 
importantly, allowing them to take part in operations and maintenance activities.  
 Another family of physical adaptation measures could revolve around enhancing the 
drainage and/or conveyance capacity of the coastal rivers. This could involve 
excavation/dredging of silting rivers to unclog their waterways. Controlled flooding to 
enhance sedimentation and thereby raise the floodplain further upstream is another 
adaptation measure that could enhance drainage by increasing the flow gradient. This 
measure has already been tested under the Khulna-Jessore Drainage Rehabilitation Project 
(EGIS 1998). Raising of the floodplain upstream helped drain the excess water, which in turn 
794 
 
reduced flood vulnerability. Post project appraisals have concluded that this tidal basin 
concept to be acceptable to the local population.  
 Another adaptation measure would involve the use of lifting pumps to take out excessive 
water from the flood affected areas may be considered as a physical adaptation. Since this 
involves high costs, it is considered only to save high value properties, infrastructure, urban 
centers and industrial zones. Pumps can also be used for the purpose of desalinization of high 
value agricultural lands. Repeated flushing of saline affected lands by freshwater and 
simultaneous disposal of excessive water can reduce soil salinity. Pumping option as an 
adaptation may, therefore, be considered to solve certain specific problems (such as 
salinization of potable water reservoirs) that are expected to occur under climate change. 
 
 7.4 Limits to adaptation and adaptive capacity 
 
 It is possible to identify four different types of limits on adaptation to changes in water 
quantity and quality (Arnell and Delaney, 2006). 
 The first is a physical limit: it may not be possible to prevent adverse effects through 
technical or institutional procedures. For example, it may be impossible to reduce demands 
for water    further   without seriously threatening health    or livelihoods. 
 Second, whilst it may be physically feasible to adapt, there may be economic constraints to 
what is affordable. 
 Third, there may be political or social limits to the implementation of adaptation measures. 
 Finally, the capacity of water management agencies and the water management system as a 
whole may act as a limit on which adaptation measures (if any) can be implemented. The low    
priority    given    to  water  management, lack of  coordination between agencies, tensions 
between national, regional and local scales, ineffective water governance and uncertainty 
over future climate change impacts constrain the ability of organizations to adapt to changes 
in water supply  and flood risk (Ivey et al., 2004; Naess et al., 2005; Crabbe and Robin, 
2006). 
8. Conclusions 
 
Bangladesh is critically vulnerable to climate change, but the core elements of its vulnerability are 
primarily related. The low coastal topography contributes to coastal inundation and saline intrusion 
in inland. The coastal area also lies in a very active cyclone corridor that transects the Bay of Bengal. 
The water supply and sanitation systems are vulnerable to extreme weather events like cyclones and 
storm surges.  Possible changes in water regime due to climate change may have serious implications 
on water supply system in this area. A major concern is the increase in water related hazards during 
wet season and decrease in water availability during dry season.  
This report indicates a general lack of attention to impacts climate change on water supply and 
sanitation in government plans. Most of the water supply facilities take heavy damage during 
795 
 
cyclones which are not fixed yet. The quality of the treated water of existing PSFs also does not 
match the health standard. There is uncertainty among the people for availability of drinking water. 
They are being forced to drink from unsafe sources which are making them prone to waterborne 
diseases. The Governmental and Non-Governmental Organizations working in the area do not work 
mutually which is reducing efficiency. A vast survey of the selected area was not possible due to lack 
of time and resource. Only selected quality parameters of the water sample were determined. 
 
9. Recommendations 
 
Basin wide planning of water management through cooperation among co-basin countries is essential 
to address the issues related to the possible impacts of climate change over the three river basins. 
Extensive research and Development for cost-effective and socially acceptable solutions is required. 
The government and NGOs should also work mutually do cope with the situation. Motivation 
activities for using safe water and sanitary latrines must be ensured to the community through 
awareness raising programs. User group may be formed among the beneficiaries for the regular 
monitoring and maintenance work. Beneficiaries must understand fully the work involved in 
constructing and operating the water supply and sanitation facilities. Both benefits and limitations 
should be clear to them, so that the community can do the construction work and maintenance with 
proper training by skill personnel. 
 
9.1 Adaptation Related to Water Supply 
 
 Increasing safe water supply coverage through extensive research for developing appropriate 
water systems. 
 Equitable Investments in infrastructure development, increasing surface water availability. 
 Replenishment of groundwater through natural and artificial recharge. 
 Storage ponds to store rainwater in coastal region. 
 Introduction of low cost, small-scale water treatment technologies. 
 Measures must also be taken to clean-up existing pollution of surface water bodies and 
saving them from further pollution. 
 Steps should be taken to fix the destroyed water supply facilities. 
 Ponds should be well protected from external pollution loads for efficient filter operation. 
 Re-excavation may be required in case of deposited salty clay.  
 
 
9.2 Adaptation Related to Sanitation 
 
 Priority to improved sanitation coverage through addressing existing challenges. 
 Increased, equitable resource allocation for improved sanitation. 
 Consideration of more technological options for both urban and rural areas considering both 
water and non-water options, e.g., eco-sanitation. 
796 
 
 Extensive research to develop climate resilient sanitation systems considering 
technologically challenged areas, e.g. water logged and coastal areas. 
 Adequate sanitation facilities in flood and cyclone shelters. 
 Raising mass awareness for improved sanitation 
References 
Ahmed, M.F. (Editor), Bangladesh Environment 2000, Bangladesh Poribesh Andolon, December 
2000, ISBN 984-31-1082-X: 709pages. 
Allan, J.A., 1998:Virtualwater: an essential element in stabilizing the political economies of the 
Middle East. Transformation of Middle Eastern Natural Environments, J.Albert,M. Bernhardsson 
and R. Kenna, Eds., Forestry and Environmental Studies Bulletin No. 103, Yale University, New 
Haven, Connecticut, 141-149. 
Arnell, N.W. and E.K. Delaney, 2006: Adapting to climate change: public water supply in 
England andWales. Climatic Change, 78, 227-255. 
Bangladesh Arsenic Mitigation Water Supply Project (BAMWSP) 2006 
BBS (Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics). Ministry of Planning. Government of the Peoples 
Republic of Bangladesh. Dhaka 1000. 
C. W. Thornthwaite (1948). "An Approach Toward a Rational Classification of Climate". 
Geographical Review 38 (1): 55–94. 
Corinne Le Quéré, Michael R. Raupach, Josep G. Canadell, Gregg Marland et al 2009. Trends in 
the sources and sinks of carbon dioxide. 
Crabbe, P. and M. Robin, 2006: Institutional adaptation of water resource infrastructures to  
limate change in eastern Ontario. Climatic Change, 78, 103-133. 
Crowley, T.J., and Burke, K., (eds.), 1998. Tectonic Boundary Conditions for Climate 
Reconstructions. New York: Oxford University Press. 
Das, P.K. and M. Radhakrishna. (1991). “Trends and pole tide in Indian tide gauge records.” 
       Proceedinds of the Indian Academy of Sciences (Earth and Planetary Sciences) 100, 177-94. 
Department Of Public Health Engineering (DPHE, Shyamnagar Upazila, Shatkhira District, Year 
2010) 
F. Farquharson et al., 2007: Impact of climate and sea level change in part of the Indian sub-
continent, CLASIC Final Report to Department for international Development, United Kingdom, 
KAR Project R8038, 125pp. 
Gerlach, T.M., 2010, Volcanic versus anthropogenic carbon dioxide: The missing science: 
EARTH, v. 55, n. 7, p. 87. 
Hay, W.W., 1996. Tectonics and climate. Geol. Rundsch., 85, 409–437. 
Hossain, M.A. and Chowdhury, J.U. (2003). Development of a Model for Forecasting Dry 
Season Hydrograph for the Jamuna at Bahadurabad. Proceedings of the Second Annual Paper 
797 
 
Meet and International Conference on Civil Engineering, Organized by IEB and BUET, Venue: 
BUET, Dhaka, July 17-18, 2003, ISBN 984-32-0777-1, pp. 25-30 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), 2001. “Working Group I Third Assessment 
Report.” Cambridge University Press. Cambridge, UK. 881 pp. 
IPCC 2007, Summary for Policymakers, in Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation and 
Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fourth Assessment Report of the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, p. 17 
IPCC, 2007: Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability.Contribution of 
Working Group II to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change [Parry, Martin L., Canziani, Osvaldo F., Palutikof, Jean P., van der Linden, Paul J., and 
Hanson, Clair E. (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 1000 pp. 
IPCC 2007, Summary for Policymakers, in Climate Change 2007: Synthesis Report, p.8, p. 11. 
Ivey, J.L., J. Smithers, R.C. De Loe and R.D. Kreutzwiser, 2004: Community capacity for 
adaptation to climate-induced water shortages: linking institutional complexity and local actors. 
Environ. Manage., 33, 36-47. 
Kerrick, D.M., 2001, Present and past nonanthropogenic CO2 degassing from the solid Earth: 
Reviews of Geophysics, v. 39, n. 4, p. 565-585. 
Kumar, K.R., K.K. Kumar, R.G. Ashrit, S.K. Patwardhan and G.B. Pant. (2002). “Climate 
change in India: issues, concerns and opportunities. Tata McGraw-Hill, New Delhi.” 
Ledley, T.S.; Sundquist, E. T.; Schwartz, S. E.; Hall, D. K.; Fellows, J. D.; Killeen, T. L. (1999). 
"Climate change and greenhouse gases". EOS 80 (39): 453. 
Marty, B., and I.N. Tolstikhin, 1998, CO2 fluxes from mid-ocean ridges, arcs and plumes: 
Chemical Geology, v. 145, p. 233-248. 
Milankovitch, M., 1941: Canon of insolation and the ice age problem (in Yugoslavian). K. Serb. 
Acad. Beorg., Spec. Publ. 132 (English translation by Israel Program for Scientific Translations, 
Jerusalem, 1969) 
Naess, L.O., G. Bang, S. Eriksen and J. Vevatne, 2005: Institutional adaptation to climate 
change: flood responses at themunicipal level inNorway.Global Environ. Change, 15, 125-138. 
National Academy of Sciences (NAS). 2001. “Climate Change Science: An Analysis of Some 
Key Questions. “ National Academies Press. 42 pp. 
National Climatic Data centre, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, United States 
Department of Commerse 
Oki, T., Sato,M., Kawamura,A.,Miyaka,M., Kanae, S. andMusiake, K., 2003b: Virtual Water 
Trade to Japan and in the World. Value of Water Research Report Series. IHE, Delft, pp. 221-
235. 
Ruddiman, W.F. (ed.), 1997. Tectonic Uplift and Climate Change. Plenum Press, New York. 
798 
 
Sano, Y. and Williams, S.N., 1996, Fluxes of mantle and subducted carbon along convergent 
plate boundaries: Geophysical Research Letters, v. 23, n. 20, p. 2749-2752. 
Solomon, S., D. Qin, M. Manning, R.B. Alley, T. Berntsen, N.L. Bindoff, Z. Chen, A. 
Chidthaisong, J.M. Gregory, G.C. Hegerl, M. Heimann, B. Hewitson, B.J. Hoskins, F. Joos, J. 
Jouzel, V. Kattsov, U. Lohmann, T. Matsuno, M. Molina, N. Nicholls, J.Overpeck, G. Raga, V. 
Ramaswamy, J. Ren, M. Rusticucci, R. Somerville, T.F. Stocker, P. Whetton, R.A. Wood and D. 
Wratt, 2007: Technical Summary. In: Climate Change 2007: The Physical Science Basis. 
Contribution of Working Group I to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change [Solomon, S., D. Qin, M. Manning, Z. Chen, M. Marquis, K.B. Averyt, 
M. Tignor and H.L. Miller (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom 
and New York, NY, USA. 
The Role of the Sun in Climate Change by Douglas V. Hoyt and Kenneth Schatten; Oxford 
University Press, 1997. ISBN: 0195094131v 
United States Environmental Protection Agency, Climate Change - Health and Environmental 
Effects 
Varekamp, J.C.R., Kreulen, R., Poorter, R.P.E., and Van Bergen, M.J., 1992, Carbon sources and 
arc volcanism, with implications for the carbon cycle: Terra Nova, v. 4, p. 363-373. 
 
 
 
 
 
799 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
ESTIMATION OF SUSPENDED SEDIMENT CONCENTRATION OF DIFFERENT 
WATER BODIES USING LOW COST PORTABLE DIGITAL CAMERA 
 
 
G. M. Jahid Hasan1, Fayzul Kabir2 and Sayed Zakir Hossain3 
 
 
ABSTRACT: Estimation of suspended sediment concentration (SSC) is important for using 
water for different domestic and drinking purposes, from various sources like rivers, ponds or 
lakes. Traditional methods for this are time consuming, costly and not easily accessible, 
especially for rural people in Bangladesh. In this study, easily accessible low cost digital camera 
was used to estimate the amount of SSC. Red (R), Green (G), Blue (B) and Gray components of 
color images with different sediment loads were tried to correlate. This experiment was 
conducted in a water tank with white background and variation with camera height and angle. 
Sediment samples were collected from bed of different water bodies. Strong linear correlation 
was observed with blue components up to 400 mg/l concentration, however, the low cost camera 
failed to differentiate higher sediment loads. Using the correlation one can easily understand the 
concentration of suspended sediment for water bodies, which can be an alternative efficient tool 
rather than conventional one. 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Almost 70% people of Bangladesh live in rural areas and depended on natural surface water for 
their daily household purposes. Suspended sediment concentration (SSC) of these surface water 
sources i.e., ponds, lakes, rivers etc. varies from 10 to 300 mg/l. But according to Bangladesh 
drinking water standard  the maximum allowable limit of SSC is 10 mg/l. Due to lack of 
knowledge about this matter and unavailability of proper measuring method, the rural people are 
failed to detect the exact amount of  SSC  of  natural  water bodies  of their locality.  
Moreover, the traditional mass balance method is laboratory oriented and is not easily accessible 
to them. They are using this high turbid water year after year and are facing various problems.  
 
Suspended sediment is defined as the very fine soil particle (mainly clay and silt) that remains in 
suspension in water for a considerable period of time without contact with the bottom. Such 
material remains in suspension due to the upward component of turbulence and currents in the 
case of turbulent water. For stagnant water like ponds, lakes lighter sediment particles remain in 
                                                        
1Professor, Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, SUST, Sylhet, Bangladesh. jahid01@yah
oo.com  
2Student, Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, SUST, Sylhet, Bangladesh. fkabirceesust@
gmail.com 
3Student, Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, SUST, Sylhet, Bangladesh. 
 
 
800 
suspension and heavier particles are settle down with respect to time. Suspended sediment 
includes particle of a size not lower than 10 µm. Generally sediments are silt, clay, and sand. 
Sand is defined as the small loose grains worn or disintegrated rock generally 0.02-2mm in 
diameter. Size of silt usually held in between 0.02-0.05 mm or less where clay is finer than 
0.002mm. In this study particles of size less than 64 µm are taken as suspended sediment. 
Suspended sediment is also classified based on their color; such as gray silt, brown silt, black silt 
etc. 
 
Several previous studies use remote sensing technique to estimate sediment concentration. The 
application of digital camera image for estimation of TSS has been reported by Lim et al. (2003). 
The purpose of their study was to verify the application of new algorithm for the estimation at 
Pari River (Iran) estuary. Digital images were taken by Kodak camera from an aircraft. Samples 
were also collected simultaneously. From the comparison of image readings with the measured 
TSS, they concluded that estimated TSS concentrations are correlated fairly well with the field 
data. An algorithm was also developed by Bejestan and Nouroozpour (2007) for processing of 
digital image into three color component RGB. In their study, they tried to correlate image 
components with SSC. The images are converted into color component Red, Green and Blue with 
a readily available image editing software and these components are tried to correlate with SSC 
of natural water body. 
 
In this study a low cost simple portable camera images were used to determine the suspended 
sediment concentration of any natural water body. For this the sediment samples were collected 
from the bottom of different water bodies. Using the sediment samples, water samples with 
different concentration were prepared and images were taken subsequently. Each image is 
converted into three color component (RGB) and another component Gray which is the average 
of RGB. These image components are tried to correlate with corresponding sediment 
concentration. Using the established correlation sediment concentration of different water bodies 
were also compared in order to comment on the utility of the developed method. Hence the 
specific objectives of this study is to find out the SSC of natural water bodies using a readily 
available, low cost, portable camera and to introduce an alternative, efficient, low cost method for 
SSC determination. 
 
 
2. Experimental setup 
 
To complete the study, soil samples were collected from bed of different water bodies and 
processed. Steps of sample collection and processing, detailed experiment, image processing etc 
are described in the following section:  
 
2.1 Preparation of sediment sample 
Suspended sediment particle of natural water body gradually settle down due to gravitational 
force. For this study sediment samples were collected from the bottom of two different ponds. 
Dry the sediment sample for several days by air. Break the lump of dried sample into smaller 
particles and finally convert it into dust form for the convenient of sieving. Sieve the sediment 
sample with 64µm sieve and collect the sediment that pass through the sieve for experiment. The 
samples are a mixture of silt and clay as shown in Fig 1. 
 
 
 
801 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.1 Sediment samples used for the experiment. 
 
 
2.2 Preparation of water tank 
Several factors need to be considered for selecting a suitable water tank, size of the tank and 
background color is the most important one. Bigger size tank can minimize the reflection effect, 
but it will create problem during mixing of sediment samples with water. Sediment particle 
gradually settle down into the bottom of water tank due to the action of gravity. Thus the depth of 
water tank should select such a way that the sediment samples can be mixed properly during 
experimental works. Without creating turbulence, uniform mixing is quiet difficult. Inner surface 
color of the tank is another important factor that should be taken into consideration. Inner color of 
the tank interferes with correct image band while taking picture of sample. If the reflection is 
high there will be wrong information in the image. Reflection effect of white color is low, so 
white surface has been selected as background color. 
 
A small rectangular tank of 22 cm × 22 cm × 16 cm size with white background has been selected 
for the experiment, which is found suitable for mixing. Water sample was prepared carefully with 
different sediment concentration and images were taken from different camera position i.e., 
vertically 1 ft above the water surface, vertically 2 ft above the water surface and 2 ft above the 
water surface with 450 angle. 
 
2.3 Image analysis 
Pictures using a digital camera (CANON IX 600) with the variation of camera position as 
mentioned above were taken for different sediment concentration. Sediment concentration was 
increased gradually from clean tap water up to 400 mg/l. Collected images were than read with an 
image editing software (Adobe Photoshop). The software transferred the captured images into 
three visible bands i.e., Red (R), Blue (B) and Green (G). In the RGB system any digital image is 
composed of pixels. A typical size of image is 512 by 512 pixels. Each pixel has an intensity 
variation between 0 (black) and 255 (white). The RGB component of any image taken from a 
specific position and distance varied at different points. For this the pixel intensities were taken 
from a zone composed of 9 different pixels and do averaging for getting the intensity value. The 
average of three subsequent images was taken for having the final RGB value for a specific 
sediment concentration. Similar procedure was applied for all the images taken from different 
camera position and different sediment samples (brown silt and gray silt). Another image 
component termed as Gray also check which is the average value of Red, Green and Blue 
intensity values. 
 
 
 
802 
3. Results and Discussion 
Correlation between pixel intensity of Red, Green, Blue and Gray color component with different 
sediment loads was established for three camera position as mentioned before. The experiment 
was done for two types of sediment samples i.e., brown silt and gray silt. Correlation between 
pixel intensity and sediment concentration are displayed in Fig. 2 to 5. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
Figure 2: Correlation between pixel intensity of blue and green component with sediment  
(brown silt) concentration for different camera position (a, b) vertically 1 ft above water surface, 
(c, d) vertically 2 ft above water surface and (e, f) 2 ft above water surface with 450 angle. 
Blue Green 
y = -0.2161x + 135.38
R2 = 0.8976
0
40
80
120
160
0 100 200 300 400
Sediment Conc. [mg/l]
Pi
xe
l I
nt
en
si
ty
y = -0.307x + 147.52
R2 = 0.9334
0
40
80
120
160
0 100 200 300 400
Sediment Conc. [mg/l]
Pi
xe
l I
nt
en
si
ty
y = -0.2255x + 119.98
R2 = 0.7424
0
40
80
120
160
0 100 200 300 400
Sediment Conc. [mg/l]
Pi
xe
l I
nt
en
si
ty
0
40
80
120
160
0 100 200 300 400
Sediment Conc [mg/l]
Pi
xe
l I
nt
en
si
ty
0
40
80
120
160
0 100 200 300 400
Sediment Conc [mg/l]
Pi
xe
l I
nt
en
si
ty
0
40
80
120
160
0 100 200 300 400
Sediment Conc [mg/l]
Pi
xe
l I
nt
en
si
ty
[a] 
 
[b] 
[c] 
 
[d] 
[e] [f] 
 
 
803 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
Figure 3: Correlation between pixel intensity of Red and Gray component with sediment (brown 
silt) concentration for different camera position (a, b) vertically 1 ft above water surface, (c, d) 
vertically 2 ft above water surface and (e, f) 2 ft above water surface with 450 angle. 
 
 
 
 
Red Gray 
0
40
80
120
160
0 100 200 300 400
Sediment Conc [mg/l]
Pi
xe
l I
nt
en
si
ty
0
40
80
120
160
0 100 200 300 400
Sediment Conc [mg/l]
Pi
xe
l I
nt
en
si
ty
0
40
80
120
160
0 100 200 300 400
Sediment Conc [mg/l]
Pi
xe
l I
nt
en
si
ty
[a] 
 
[c] 
 
[e] 
0
40
80
120
160
0 100 200 300 400
Sediment Conc. [mg/l]
Pi
xe
l I
nt
en
si
ty
0
40
80
120
160
0 100 200 300 400
Sediment Conc. [mg/l]
Pi
xe
l I
nt
en
si
ty
0
40
80
120
160
0 100 200 300 400
Sediment Conc. [mg/l]
Pi
xe
l I
nt
en
si
ty
[b] 
[d] 
[f] 
 
 
804 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
Figure 4: Correlation between pixel intensity of blue and green component and sediment (gray 
silt) concentration for different camera position (a, b) vertically 1 ft above water surface, (c, d) 
vertically 2 ft above water surface, and (e, f) 2 ft above water surface with 450 angle. 
 
 
 
 
 
Blue Green 
y = -0.1871x + 140.19
R2 = 0.9297
0
40
80
120
160
0 100 200 300 400
Sediment Conc [mg/l]
Pi
xe
l I
nt
en
si
ty
y = -0.2993x + 145.09
R2 = 0.9401
0
40
80
120
160
0 100 200 300 400
Sediment Conc [mg/l]
Pi
xe
l I
nt
en
si
ty
y = -0.2032x + 109.2
R2 = 0.7115
0
40
80
120
160
0 100 200 300 400
Sediment Conc [mg/l]
Pi
xe
l I
nt
en
si
ty
0
40
80
120
160
0 100 200 300 400
Sediment Conc [mg/l]
Pi
xe
l I
nt
en
si
ty
0
40
80
120
160
0 100 200 300 400
Sediment Conc [mg/l]
Pi
xe
l I
nt
en
si
ty
0
40
80
120
160
0 100 200 300 400
Sediment Conc [mg/l]
Pi
xe
l I
nt
en
si
ty
[a] 
 
[c] 
 
[e] 
[b] 
[d] 
[f] 
 
 
805 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
Figure 5: Correlation between pixel intensity of red and gray component and sediment (gray silt) 
concentration for different camera position (a, b) vertically 1 ft above water surface, (c, d) 
vertically 2 ft above water surface and (e, f) 2 ft above water surface with 450 angle. 
 
From the above figures it is observed that the data relationship for red, green, gray component are 
scattered compared to blue components. Strong correlation R2 ≈ 0.9 is observed with blue 
component (Fig. 2 and 4) for both the sediment samples. Linear regression equations obtained 
from the analysis are summarized in Table 1. Since blue color component with all three camera  
Red Gray 
0
40
80
120
160
0 100 200 300 400
Sediment Conc [mg/l]
Pi
xe
l I
nt
en
si
ty
0
40
80
120
160
0 100 200 300 400
Sediment Conc [mg/l]
Pi
xe
l I
nt
en
si
ty
0
40
80
120
160
0 100 200 300 400
Sediment Conc [mg/l]
Pi
xe
l I
nt
en
si
ty
0
40
80
120
160
0 100 200 300 400
Sediment Conc. [mg/l]
Pi
xe
l I
nt
en
si
ty
0
40
80
120
160
0 100 200 300 400
Sediment Conc. [mg/l]
Pi
xe
l I
nt
en
si
ty
0
40
80
120
160
0 100 200 300 400
Sediment Conc. [mg/l]
Pi
xe
l I
nt
en
si
ty
[a] 
 
[c] 
 
[e] 
[b] 
[d] 
[f] 
 
 
806 
Table1:  Equations developed for brown silt and gray silt 
 
Camera  
position 
Equation  for 
brown silt R
2 Equation for gray silt R
2 
Vertical 1 ft y = -0.216 x + 135.4 0.898 y = -0.187 x + 140.2 0.930 
Vertical 2 ft y = -0.307 x + 147.5 0.933 y = -0.299 x + 145.0 0.940 
Inclined 2 ft y = -0.226 x + 120.0 0.742 y = -0.203 x + 109.2 0.712 
 
positions produces best correlation for both sediment samples; hence, for field calibration, this 
equation was used. 
 
For validation of the developed method, several field test was done in 3 different ponds. Images 
were collected using the same digital camera for different camera position and water samples 
were collected simultaneously. The collected images for each sample were then analyzed and 
pixel intensity of color components (Red, Green and Blue) was extracted. The value of RGB put 
into the equation as displayed in Table 1. Thus the image based sediment concentration can be 
determined. Actual sediment concentration of different water sample has been measured by 
traditional mass balance method. The measured sediment concentration by image based method 
and mass balance method for different silt types has then been compared and depicted in the Fig. 
6 which shows a fairly good comparison. Hence the low cost digital camera technique can be 
used for predicting suspended sediment concentration. However, for very low (< 10 mg/l) and 
very high (> 400 mg/l) concentration the low cost digital camera failed to predict actual 
concentration. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig 6: Comparison between actual and calculated concentration for brown and gray silt. 
 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Sample 1 Sample 2 Sample 3
Se
di
m
en
t C
on
ce
nt
ra
tio
n [
m
g/l
] 
Different Samples
Actual Conc.
Conc. for Brown Silt
Conc. for Gray Silt
 
 
807 
4. Conclusion 
Aim of the study is to introduce an alternative method for suspended sediment concentration 
determination of any natural water body. The conducted study showed that, there exists a strong 
correlation between suspended sediment concentrations with pixel intensity variation of different 
color components. Blue color component has the strongest relationship than red, green or gray for 
different types of silt and camera position. The developed camera based method of SSC 
determination produces fairly good comparison with actual concentration measured by mass 
balance method. The developed technique is very much efficient and cost effective compared to 
the traditional method, hence can be used as a first approximation for predicting SSC. 
 
. 
References 
Lim, H. S., M. Z. Matjafri and K. Abdullah, 2003. Establishing a global algorithm for water 
quality mapping from multi-dates images, Proceedings of the Map Asia Environmental 
Planning Conference, Oct. 13-15, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, pp 1-14. 
Bejestan M. S. and  Nouroozpour S., 2007, Use of Image Processing Technique to Estimate 
Sediment Concentration, Journal of applied sciences, Vol. 7(20), pp 3096-3100.  
 
 
 
 
 
708 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
HEALTH RISK ASSOCIATED WITH URBAN WATER SUPPLY: A CASE STUDY OF 
KHULNA CITY CORPORATION (KCC) AREA 
 
 
A.K.M. Maminul Islam1, Md. Abdur Rab2, Md. Manjur-A-Elahi3, Dr. Md. Rezaul Karim4 
and Dr. Khondoker Mahbub Hassan5 
 
 
ABSTRACT: Water quality focuses on the various aspects of physical, chemical and 
microbiological parameters of water by which the state of water supply can easily be understood. 
Measurements of various water quality parameters play the key role in detecting the status of 
contamination and suitability of a particular water supply of an area. Khulna Water Supply and 
Sewerage Authority (KWASA) of Bangladesh is supplying water to the Khulna city dwellers 
through its distribution network after the treatment of water drawn from surface and groundwater 
sources. However, the quality of water is at risk to deteriorate during its flow through the piped-
network system as regular monitoring is not done for the distribution network. In order to 
investigate the potential contamination in the supplied water, samples were collected at the 
consumers tap from different locations of the 23 wards in Khulna city area and analyzed in the 
laboratory. This study revealed that many of the important water quality parameters such as pH, 
turbidity, conductivity, chloride, TDS were within the permissible limit of BDS and WHO while 
color and hardness exceeded the allowable limit for a large margin. The microbiological water 
quality assessment at some selected locations identified the presence of pathogenic organisms in 
the supplied water. The QHRA model showed that the disease burden due to E. coli in KWASA 
supply water varied within 1.7 µDPY to 3.5 µDPY with a median of 2.8 µDPY which was very 
alarming. Furthermore, this study identified the major causes of contamination in the water 
supply system of Khulna city area and finally some guidelines were proposed to improve the 
quality of supply water. Public awareness as well as regular monitoring was imperative to 
ensuring a sustainable water supply system in the city area. 
 
 
 
                                                        
1 Under Graduate student, Civil Engineering Department, KUET, Khulna, Bangladesh.  shaikat.engr.ce@
gmail.com 
2 Under Graduate student, Civil Engineering Department, KUET, Khulna, Bangladesh. abdur.rab06kuet@ 
gmail.com 
3 Deputy Project Engineer, DOM-INNO Developers Limited, Dhaka, Bangladesh. manjurkuet@gmail.com 
4 Professor & Head, Department of Civil Engineering, KUET, Khulna, Bangladesh. rezaulmd@gmail.com  
5 Associate Professor,Department of Civil Engineering,KUET,Khulna,Bangladeshkhmhassan@yahoo.com 
709 
 
1. Introduction  
 
Throughout history, water has been considered a natural resource critical to human survival and 
human history can generally be considered to be water-centered. The quality of drinking water 
is closely associated with human health, and providing safe drinking water is one of important 
public health priorities. One of the primary goals of WHO and its member states is that “All 
people, whatever their stage of development and their social and economic conditions, have the 
right to have access to an adequate supply of safe drinking water.”(WHO, 2006). Water another 
name is life, but it becomes causes of destroying life when the drinking water is physically, 
chemically and biologically contaminated and unsafe. Estimated 80 percent of all diseases and 
over one third of deaths in developing countries are caused by the consumption of contaminated 
water, and on an average as much as one tenth of each person's productive time is sacrificed to 
water-related diseases (UNCED, 1992). Over 60% of the communicable diseases are due to poor 
environmental health conditions arising from unsafe and inadequate water supply and poor 
hygienic and sanitation practices (Abebe Ls; 1986).Water therefore has a profound effect on 
human health both as means to reduce disease and media through which disease causing agent 
may be transmitted.  
   The quality of drinking water in Bangladesh is also at high risk. Problems are acute, 
especially in the urban areas due to increased migration of rural people and increased economic 
growth as well. The study area of Khulna City Corporation (KCC) is located in the southwest 
Bangladesh. Khulna, is  one of the  densely populated urban areas which  has  been suffering 
from  inadequate supply  of drinking water often  associated  with water quality problems 
too. People served by KWASA are only 18% of the total population and length of pipe line is 227 
km. This pipe water can be contaminated due to the failure to disinfect water or maintain a proper 
disinfection residual, low pipe line water pressure; intermittent service; excessive network 
leakages, corrosion of parts, inadequate sewage disposal, and inequitable pricing and usage of 
water. So it is very important to pay attention to the quality of water supplied to dwellers and also 
to find the ways to improve the quality of water of KWASA. 
   A drinking water system’s water quality may be acceptable when the water just leaves a 
treatment plant. However, a variety of physical, chemical and biological transformations can 
happen once the water travels through a distribution system (Lahlou, 2002). Deteriorating water 
treatment facilities and distribution systems can pose a significant public health threat, as 
described in a study in Uzbekistan (Semenza et. al., 1998). In a study for CWASA of 
Bangladesh, it was revealed that the supply water at some locations did not meet the potable 
water quality standard (Zuthi et. al, 2009). Since contaminated water can pose a potential source 
of health risk to Khulna city dwellers, the present investigation was undertaken with an objective 
to assess important water quality parameters of the KWASA’s supply water. The study was 
undertaken as part of the under-graduate program of the Department of Civil Engineering of 
University of Engineering and Technology (KUET). 
 
2. Study Area 
 
The study area of Khulna City Corporation (KCC) is located in the southwest Bangladesh. The 
city along with its surrounding is bounded  by  the longitude 89°28′ to 89°37′ East and latitude 
22°46′ to 22°58′ North. The Bhairab on northern side, Rupsa River in the middle part and Pasur 
710 
 
on the southern side flows along eastern margin of the city and Mayur on the northern side and 
Hatia River on the southern side flow along the western side of the city. Khulna City Corporation 
is divided into 31 wards. But there is no water supply in 8 wards (Ward no: 1 to 8) as the 
responsible authority informed. Hence the other 23 wards are the study area of the conducted 
study.  
 
Table-1: KWASA at a glance (Arthur, 2009) 
  
Total area of Khulna  city  59.57 km2  
No. of wards  31 
Population (2008 est.)  855,650 
Population  served by KWASA  155,100  
Average Consumption  125 l/c/d   
Source of water of KWASA  Surface water, Ground Water 
Production type of KWASA  Intermittent  
Total Pipe connections  15252 
Inactive connections  2561(17% of total connection)  
Illegal Connections  4,000 
No. of Street Hydrants  503 (Hardly 100 of them are active)  
Pipe Diameter 75mm to 300mm  
Total length of pipe line  226.43km  
Handpump Tubewell (KWASA) 3748 deep  Hand pump Tubewells (HTWs) and 5538  Shallow HTWs 
Pumping Hour 4 hr/day 
Potential Capacity 2000 m3/d  
Treatment Method Coagulation, Flocculation, Filtration 
 
There are of two major sources of water for water supply in KCC area:  
 Surface water source 
 Ground water source.  
   Khulna City Corporation water distribution system is classified depending upon the method 
involved as  
o System with direct pumping and 
o System with pumping and storage overhead tank. 
   Water may be supplied to the consumers either intermittently i.e., for a few fixed hours of the 
day or continuously i.e., for all the 24 hours of the day. Khulna City Corporation supplies water 
to the consumers intermittently i.e., for few fixed hours of the day i.e., 5 A.M. to 12 P.M. and 1 
P.M. to 5P.M. or 5 A.M. to 12 P.M. and 1 P.M. to 7 P.M.  
 
3. Materials and Methodology 
 
KWASA supplies water to the Khulna city dwellers. Field observations of Water supply, water 
storage, pumping procedure i.e. the total Water Supply Network was conducted and sample 
collection and laboratory analyses were performed.  
711 
 
3.1 Water sampling and sample collection 
 
Meaningful and reliable sampling assures the validity of analytical findings. Therefore, utmost 
care was exercised to ensure that the analyses were representative of the actual composition of 
the water samples. The following tools were used in sampling: 
 Sterilized Bags 
 Ethyl Alcohol 
 Ice Box 
 Gloves 
   Gloves were put on hands and Ethyl Alcohol was used to sterilize the hands. The samples 
from different wards were collected in sterilized bags with the help of gloves and Ethyl Alcohol 
and kept in an ice box and prior to filling the sterilized bags were rinsed two to three times with 
the water to be collected. The samples were labeled with 
 Bottle no.  
 No. of sample  
 Date of sample collection 
 Time of sample collection 
 Location of the sample 
   In general about 250 ml samples were collected for bacteriological tests and 250 ml samples 
were collected for physical and chemical parameter tests. Samples were collected in two stages. 
In the first stage, two samples from each ward are collected. In the second stage the sample 
number was raised to four from each ward. Collected samples were promptly carried to the 
Environmental Engineering laboratory of the Department of Civil Engineering of KUET and 
various important water quality parameters were measured as early as possible.   
 
 Figure 1: Sample collection Source 
          Sample collection Source 
712 
 
 
After collecting the samples were transported to the Environmental Engineering laboratory of the 
Department of Civil Engineering of KUET and following three types of parameter was tested:  
 Physical Parameters: Color, Turbidity. 
 Chemical Parameters: PH, Chloride, Hardness, Iron, Alkalinity, TDS, Conductivity.  
 Microbial Parameters: Total Coliform & E.Coli.  
 
3.2 Quantitative health risk analysis (QHRA):   
 
The quality of pipe water may reach to level of unsatisfactory that it can possess hazardous effect 
on human health. Hence the health risk associated with the deteriorated quality of piped water 
should be analyzed. The best process of health risk assessment is to use Quantitative Health Risk 
Analysis (QHRA) Modelling. In water supply context, QHRA is a technique to estimate predicted 
disease burden based on input data about water quality such as TTC, E.coli, arsenic etc.. QHRA 
is a scientific model whose output is only the prediction and estimation and its accuracy fully 
depends on the accuracy of input data and assumptions applied on the model. The reference of 
level of risk is measured with a unit matric called DALY (Disability Adjusted Life Year). The 
basic principle of the DALY is to weight each health effect for its severity from 0 (normal good 
health) to 1 (death). The DALY is the sum of years of life lost by premature mortality (YLL) and 
years of healthy life lost in states of less than full health, i.e., years lived with disabilities (YLD), 
which are standardized by means of severity weights.   
Thus, DALY= YLL+YLD 
   Key advantages of using DALYs are its “aggregation” of different effects and its combining 
of quality and quantity of life. The microbial data of KCC water supply expectedly E.coli that 
were ascertained by laboratory analysis and used as model input. As it is proved that presence of 
arsenic in supply water is much lower or nil and hence arsenic data was not input in the model. 
The microbial indicators E.coli from test results are put into the QHRA model and hence 
associated disease burdens are assessed for KCC water supply. 
 
4. Data Analysis, Results and Discussions 
 
Total 138 numbers of samples were collected in two stages from 23 wards of KCC Area and 
tested in the Environmental Engineering Laboratory of KUET. At the 1st stage 46 no of samples 
were collected and at the 2nd stage 92 samples were collected. A no. of 10 different parameters is 
tested. All of the parameters are tested in standard procedures.  
 
Table-2: Summary of test results of physical parameters of KCC water supply 
 
Parameters Unit Max Min. Average BDS WHO GV Sample size 
Turbidity NTU 3.66 0.92 2.09 10 5 138 
Color Pt.Co 89 0 34.5 15 15 138 
 
 
 
713 
 
4.1 Color:  
 
Color is related to the aesthetic view of human being. Colorful water is not acceptable as drinking 
water. The color values of the samples tested are mostly above the allowable range. From the 
average value table and the wardwary graph of color value we can see that only 5 wards shows 
the standard value of color for drinking purpose. The Graph reveals that ward no. 25 & 26 shows 
highest values for color (89 Pt.Co.) while the minimum value is nil in some wards like 15, 17, 19. 
 
 
Figure 2: Wardwary Variation in Color value 
 
4.2 Turbidity:  
 
The Turbidity is important because it affects the acceptability of water to consumers. All the 
Turbidity results of the water samples tested are within the allowable range (10 NTU). The 
maximum value of Turbidity is 3.66 NTU (ward no. 9) and the minimum one is 0.92 NTU (ward 
no. 16).From Turbidity point of view, the supply water is satisfactory for consume.  
 
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31
Maximum
MinimumTu
rb
id
ity
, 
N
TU
  
 
 
 
Ward no. 
 
 
 Figure 3: Wardwary Variation in Turbidity value 
 
714 
 
Table-3: Summary of test results of chemical parameters of KCC water supply 
 
Parameters Unit Max Min. Average BDS WHO GV Sample size 
pH mg/l 8.49 7.09 7.95 6.5-8.5  138 
Conductivity µs/cm 2611 648 1231 600-1000  138 
Chloride mg/l 750 160 479 150-600* 250 138 
Hardness mg/l as CaCo3 1628 202 756 200-500  138 
Alkalinity mg/l 1560 180 685 400  138 
TDS mg/l 1687 259 769 1000 1000 138 
 
4.3 pH:  
 
 Figure 4: Wardwary Variation in pH value 
 
All the pH values of the water samples tested are within the allowable limit. The maximum value 
of pH is 8.49 (ward no. 12) and the minimum one is 7.09 (ward no. 22). The average of all pH 
value is 7.95. Average value shows that most of the value of pH is within 7.50 to 8.00. For pH 
value the supply water of KWASA is acceptable. 
 
4.4 Conductivity: 
 
Most of the average values of electric conductivity are above 1000 µs/cm which is not a very 
good sign for drinking water. Only 6 wards show values less than the Bangladeshi standards 
(600-1000 µs/cm). So in the most cases the electric conductance values of supply water of 
KWASA are above allowable limit guided by BD and WHO standard.  So the supply water is 
not acceptable for drinking purpose in terms of conductivity.   
715 
 
 Figure 5: Wardwary Variation in Conductivity value 
4.5 Chloride: 
 
All the average test results of Chloride show acceptable value of chlorine contamination. The 
highest average value of chloride is 750 mg/l which is acceptable for coastal area like Khulna. All 
other values are within 250mg/l to below or just above 600 mg/l which is the range of BD 
standard. So, it can be said that supply water of KWASA is acceptable in the sense of chloride 
contamination.  
 
 
Figure 6: Wardwary Variation in Chloride value 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
716 
 
4.6 Hardness: 
 
  
Figure 7: Wardwary Variation in Hardness value 
The test results of total hardness shows that most of the values exceed the allowable limit of 
hardness for drinking water quality. Ward 22 shows the highest value (1628 mg/l as CaCO3) 
which is a hazard. Average value is 756 mg/l as CaCO3 which is well above the Bangladeshi limit. 
Only 6 wards of KCC area shows acceptable limit of Hardness for drinking purpose. So the 
quality of piped water of KWASA is not acceptable according to hardness.  
 
4.7 Alkalinity: 
 
From the test results and graph it is shown that alkalinity is lower where hardness is lower and 
higher where hardness is higher. It indicates that the supply water consists of higher bicarbonate, 
carbonates and hydroxides.  
0
500
1000
1500
2000
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31
Maximum
MinimumA
lk
al
in
ity
,m
g/
l
Ward no.
 
Figure 8: Wardwary Variation in Alkalinity value 
 
717 
 
The highest value is in the ward no. 19. The wards from 22 to 30 show greater value of alkalinity. 
The lowest value of alkalinity is 180 mg/l at ward no. 20. From alkalinity point of view, the 
supply water is not very much pleasant. 
 
4.8 Total dissolved solid (TDS):  
 
The test result and the wardwary variation graph for TDS value shows only three wards namely 
ward no. 9, 17 and 22 represents higher value of TDS than the acceptable standards (1000 mg/l). 
Most of the value lies between 300-900 mg/l which indicates that the water quality is good to fair 
enough to be consumed. As four values exceed 1200 mg/l then they are categorized as 
unacceptable. Besides these the water is pleasant for drinking.  
 
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31
Maximum
Minimum
To
ta
l D
is
so
lv
ed
  S
ol
id
, m
g/
l
 
 
Ward no. 
 
Figure 9: Wardwary Variation in TDS value 
 
Table-4: Summary of bacteriological test results of KCC water supply 
 
Parameters Unit Max Min. Average BDS WHO GV Sample size 
Total coliform No/100 ml 28 2 13.33 0 0 138 
E. coli No/100 ml 18 0 5.26 0 0 138 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
718 
 
4.9 Total coliform (TC):   
 
The figure-13 shows the wardwary variation in Total Coliform concentration. The allowable limit 
for total Coliform concentration is zero in per 100 ml. All the test values show much higher 
values than the allowable one. So the water is unhygienic to drink and shouldn’t consume. 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10: Wardwary Variation in Total Coliform value 
 
4.10 E. coli:  
 
The principal risk associated with supply water is that of infectious disease related to faecal 
contamination. Hence, the microbial examination of drinking water emphasizes assessment of the 
hygienic quality of supply. In my study E.Coli concentration is found in every ward. So the 
supply water of KWASA is not pleasant for drinking and may cause adverse health effect. 
0
5
10
15
20
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31
Maximum
Minimum
Fa
ec
al
 C
ol
ifo
rm
, n
o/
10
0 
m
l
 
 
Ward no.  
Figure 11: Wardwary Variation in Faecal Coliform value 
 
 
719 
 
4.11 Health risk assessment:  
 
Quantitative Health Risk Assessment (QHRA) is used to indicate the risk associated with the 
quality of water. The bacteriological test results of KCC supply water reveal the presence of E. 
coli in substantial numbers. These microbial indicators E. coli from test results are put into the 
QHRA model (Howard et al, 2006) and hence associated disease burdens are assessed for KCC 
water supply.  After E.Coli values are ascertained as inputs the following outputs are found:  
 
   The median is 4 for microbial concentration (E.Coli) and the minimum and maximum values 
are 0 and 18 respectively for E.Coli concentration and the 95%ile value is 11.45 µDPY.  
 
Figure 12: Health Risk Assessment by QHRA Model (For E.Coli) 
 
 The E. coli obtained from the tests performed in KCC water were input into the QHRA model  
to find out the scenario of microbial burden, scenario of viral burden and scenario of protozoa 
burden. The output from the model appear in the figure that the scenario of microbial burden due 
to presence of E. coli in water varies from 1.7 µDPY at 5%ile to 3.5 µDPY at 95%ile and the 
90% confident interval is 2.8 µDPY. It means that maximum tolerable loss of 3.5 healthy life per 
million person over a year and minimum tolerable loss of 1.7 healthy life per million person per 
Simple statistics for data in columns A and B 
  Median 95%ile Minimum Maximum 
Microbial (A) 4 11.45 0 18 
Arsenical (B) 0 0 0 0 
Percentile:   95% ile   
          
720 
 
year. 
   The viral burden for E.coli of 95%ile with <1GV (Guiding value) it varies 1.7 µDPY to 3.4 
µDPY that is tolerable loss of (1.7 to 3.4) healthy life per million person over a year whereas the 
acceptable tolerance value is 1.7 µDPY. Hence the viral burden due to E.coli in KCC water is 
beyond above the tolerable limit.  
   The bacterial burden for E. coli of 95%ile with <1 GV is ranging from 0.4 µDPY to 2.8 
µDPY whereas the minimum tolerable limit is 0.4 µDPY. Here is also appears that bacterial 
burden due to E.coli of KCC water is above the allowable limit. 
   The protozoal burden for E.coli of 95%ile with <1 GV is ranging from -1.9 µDPY to 0.3 
µDPY whereas the minimum tolerable limit is -1.9 µDPY. Here is also appears that protozoal 
burden due to E.coli of KCC water is above minimum tolerable range. The summary of the 
disease burden associated with E. coli in 95%ile, 5%ile and median value to make comparison 
with the tolerable limit according to WHO is presented in the table below:    
 
Table-5: Disease burden due to microbial contaminants 
  
Disease burden in µDPY Microbial 
Contamination 95%ile 5%ile Median 
WHOGV 
(µDPY) 
Highest result from 
allowable value 
 Viral burden due to 
E. coli 3.4 1.7 2.7 1.7 2 times 
Bacterial burden due 
to E. coli 2.8 0.4 1.6 0.4 7 times 
Protozoa burden due 
to E. coli 0.3 -1.9 -0.8 -1.9  
 
5. Causes Related To Deterioration Of Supply Water Of KCC Area 
 
Through improved research, monitoring and surveillance, increased understanding of distribution 
system deficiencies of KWASA, the causes of contamination of supply water of KCC area is 
identified. The causes are as follows:  
 Inadequate disinfection residual: 
Lack of residual in the system is a warning sign that organics, including potential pollutants, have 
entered the system and has been used as an indicator of contamination. There is evidence that 
problems exist regarding proper disinfection and maintenance of an adequate residual in KWASA.  
 Inadequate Pressure:  
It is thought that inadequate pressure and resulting reverse flow or back-siphoning of water is a 
common cause of distribution system contamination worldwide. In Bangladesh, it was observed 
that system pressure dropped at short distances away from overhead tanks and pump houses, with 
some areas even experiencing zero pressure (Chowdhury et al., 2002). KWASA supply method is 
intermittent and consumers often complain that they can’t store much water due to very low 
pressure.  
 Intermittent water supply:  
A Intermittent water supply means that, for the majority of the time that water is not provided to 
households, pressure in the system is drastically reduced and stagnant water remaining in the 
721 
 
pipelines draws surrounding contaminants into the potable supply. The supply water of KWASA 
is intermittent and hence it may be a big cause of contamination to supply water. 
 Leakages:  
Leaks in distribution systems have been found to result in poor quality water. There are several 
numbers of leakages in the distribution system of KWASA which is inspected during the study. 
Besides this several no of illegal connections (approx. 4000) also leads to leakages. So the water 
of KWASA is being contaminated through these leakages.  
 Corrosion and Ageing infrastructure:  
All distribution systems deteriorate over time; corrosion is an essential factor in the natural 
ageing process. High concentration of corrosion can change the physical, chemical and microbial 
quality of water. Approximately 20% of the piping of KWASA is corroded and leaking and over 
50% of sluice valves and fittings are badly rusted. As a result the water gets contaminated.  
 Improper Waste Collection and Poor Sanitation:  
Inadequate waste collection and its potential for contamination of the water supply is a significant 
problem in developing countries. The Waste collection system of Khulna region is not good and 
people dump their waste here and there. They even don’t aware about hygiene practices.  Hence 
this is a great source of contamination.  
 Inequitable pricing and usage of water:  
The use of water without being monetarily charged is a serious problem in developing countries. 
The volume of water output is underestimated, further decreasing water supply and increasing 
shortages, exacerbating problems with low pressure and intermittent service which then affect 
water quality. The tariff for per connection per month for supply water is very low in Khulna and 
there is a significant no. of illegal connections which results to the deterioration of quality of 
supply water. 
  
6. Recommendation For Improvement of Supply Water Quality of KWASA  
 
The following guidelines should be suggested to improve the supply water quality: 
 
 All existing distribution pipe should be abandoned as it has been the primary source of 
water contamination.  
 All service connections must be replaced. This may sound drastic, but a number of pipes 
are clogged and NRW needs to be combated.  
 The authority should monitor the whole distribution program regularly.   
 Proper disinfection should be done and disinfection residual should be maintained. 
 Both routine sampling for microbial quality and real-time (and possibly online) 
monitoring of parameters linked to microbial quality at selected locations throughout the 
storage and distribution system should be performed. 
 Asbestos cement pipe should be replaced. Likewise GI pipe needs replacement every 10 
years due to corrosion. 
 It is important for staff of KWASA to start keeping records now of all pipe repairs, pipe 
leaks pipe bursts etc. This will provide important data on the priority areas for 
rehabilitation.  
 Waste should be collected properly and sanitation system should be improved. 
722 
 
 Illegal connections should be identified and closed down and meter should be provided to 
document water usage and tariff should be increased to a desired extent.  
 Public awareness can also play an important role to help prevent such problems.  
7. Conclusion 
  
Khulna city dwellers are not only suffering from inadequate water supply but also are they posed 
to serious threat due to the scarcity of safe water. Water quality test results of random samples 
collected from 23 wards of KCC Area revealed that the microbial water quality deteriorated 
during its flow from treatment plant through the distribution system. The physical and chemical 
condition is not also very pleasant. KCC dwellers are at a great health risk (specially from 
microbial concentration) which can take adverse form as time passes by. Therefore, it can be 
concluded from the findings of the study that the KWASA should not solely rely upon its 
treatment plant’s efficiency. KWASA’s piped water supply systems are generally buried complex 
reticulations and they are difficult to operate and maintain. Nevertheless, they are as important as 
water resource and treatment facilities in ensuring the supply of safe drinking-water. Continuous 
monitoring facilities should be in place in the distribution system in order to protect those 
facilities. The authority should also conduct regular monitoring program to prevent possible 
contamination of water along its distribution network by cross connections, cross contamination 
by leaking pipes, improper domestic storage etc. Public awareness can significantly reduce such 
contaminations of supply water. The situation may aggravate in near future if the authority does 
not pay attention and take immediate actions to restore water quality in the distribution system. 
 
References 
Abebe Ls. (1986). Hygienic water quality; Its relation to health and the testing aspects in tropical  
conditions, Department of Civil Engineering, Tempe ere University, Finland. 
APHA AWWA, WPCF. 1998. Standard methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater. 
19
th 
Edition. 
Arthur M. (2009). Bangladesh: Supporting the Establishment of the Khulna Water Supply and      
Sewerage Authority, Technical Assistance Consultant’s Report, ADB. 
Chowdhury, M. A. I., Ahmed, M. F. & Gaffar, M. A. (2002). Management of nonrevenue water in 
four cities of Bangladesh. J. Am. Wat. Wks Assoc. 94(8), 64–75. 
Lahlou Z. M. (2002). Water quality in distribution systems. Tech Brief. A national drinking water 
clearinghouse fact sheet. West Virginia University . 
Semenza J, Roberts L, Henderson, A, Bogan J and Rubin C. (1998). Water distribution system 
and diarrheal disease transmission: a case study in Uzbekistan. American Journal of Tropical    
Medicine and Hygiene. 59(6): 941-6.  
UNCED. (1992). Protection of the Quality and Supply of Freshwater Resources: Application of       
Integrated Approaches to the Development, Management and Use of Water Resources. The 
United Nations Conference on Environment and Development. Chapter 18, Agenda 21. 
WHO. (2006). Guidelines for Drinking Water Quality (3rd edition), World Health Organization,   
Geneva, Switzerland. 
Zuthi M. F. R, Biswas M. and Bahar M. N. (2009). Assessment of supply water quality in the 
Chittagong city of Bangladesh., CUET, Chittagong. ARPN Journal of Engineering and Applied 
Sciences, vol. 4, no. 3. 
 723 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
RE-THINKING SLUMS AND SQUATTERS ALTERNATIVE SUSTAINABLE 
APPROACH TO SOLVE HOUSING CRISIS IN METROPOLITAN CITIES 
 
 
Md. Arefeen Ibrahim1 and Mania Tahsina Taher2  
 
 
ABSTRACT: Squatter settlements in many of 21st century urban cities are inevitable 
phenomena. Living condition in these settlements suffer from overcrowding, inadequate 
accommodation, limited access to clean water and sanitation, lack of proper waste disposal 
system and deteriorating air quality. Squatter settlements are increasingly seen by public 
decision-makers as ‘slums of hope’ rather than ‘slums of despair’. There is abundant evidence of 
innovative solutions developed by the poor to improve their own living environments. This paper 
will assess the question if ideas of contemporary architecture can be implemented in providing 
ecological living for squatter settlements, along with a discussion on probable suggestions in 
relation to their daily living pattern. This also presents several case studies of sustainable living in 
high-density urban areas and slum settlements in different context. The paper concludes 
providing some strategies and policies that might be helpful to the policy makers in providing 
sustainable settlement for urban squatter dwellers. 
 
1. Introduction: 
 
To define a squatter settlement, In general it can be said as a residential area in an urban locality 
inhabited by the very poor who have no access to tenured land of their own, and hence "squat" on 
vacant land, either private or public (Sandhu, 1995). As these settlements are growing illegally on 
vacant lands, therefore, urban policies are not very active regarding the development of these 
areas. The simple shelters that the slum dwellers erect accord with their rudimentary building 
skills, can be erected and re-erected at short notice. Cities like Mumbai, Dhaka, Caracas; also 
Bogotá, Mexico City, Cairo, Lagos, Johannesburg are some of the examples where growth of 
squatters and slums are taking on such a fast pace that they are encroaching on most of the urban 
fabric. It is further projected that, in the next 30 years, the global number of slum dwellers will 
increase by approximately 2 billion, if no decisive action is taken. According to ‘The Challenge 
of Slums Global Report 2003’ prepared by UN-Habitat, national approaches to squatter 
settlements have generally shifted from negative policies (such as forced eviction, benign neglect 
and involuntary resettlement etc.) to more positive policies (such as, self-help and in situ 
upgrading, enabling and rights-based policies). In some cases, squatter settlements are not 
classified as urban settlements precisely because they lack services to qualify basic human needs. 
As a case study, ‘Dharavi’ in Mumbai, India, is the largest slum in Asia. According to Dharavi 
                                                        
1Assistant Professor, Department of Architecture, AIUB, Dhaka, Bangladesh. arefeen@aiub.edu 
2Lecturer, Department of Architecture, AIUB, Dhaka,Bangladesh. maniataher@aiub.edu 
 724 
Development Authority, Slum dwellers make up 60% of the population in Mumbai and while 
their land only takes up 6% of the city of Mumbai in Dharavi. The settlement is located in the 
heart of the city and therefore extremely valuable in terms of the current real estate boom. The 
slum spreads over an area of approximately 1175 acres, has a population density of 18,300 people 
per acre; this density is comparable only with Kibera, Nairobi’s second largest squatter  
  
 
 
 
settlements, and Mexican shantytowns. There are 86,000 housing structures: typically Cramped 
approximately 150 sq. ft. houses each, with no natural light or ventilation, without running water 
or sanitation. There is one toilet here for every 150 people, with water shortages. Dharavi also 
faces transportation, drinking water, drainage and sewerage problems.  
 
2. Causes: 
 
The characteristics associated with squatters and slums vary from place to place; slums are 
usually characterized by urban decay, high rates of poverty, and unemployment. They are  
 
 
 
 Figure 1. Graph chart on population living in slums 
Source: Emmanuelle Bournay, UNEP/GRID-Arendal                          
Figure 2. Dharavi slum in Mumbai, India 
Source: www.dharavi.org 
 
 725 
commonly seen as "breeding grounds" for social problems such as crime, drug addiction, 
alcoholism, high rates of mental illness, and suicide. In many poor countries they exhibit high 
rates of disease due to unsanitary conditions, malnutrition, and lack of basic health care. In spite 
of all these issues, people choose to live in squatter settlements for many reasons.  
   The prime reason is the inability to afford any other type of accommodation and the freedom 
from rent and civic obligations. The initial structures in squatter settlement are small in size, 
made of low-quality materials like- polythene sheet, straws, used corrugated iron sheet etc. The 
simple buildings they erect accord with their rudimentary building skills, can be erected, re-
erected, and even expanded at short notice. "The Challenge of Slums: Global Report on Human 
Settlements 2003"—the largest study ever done by the United Nations Human Settlements 
Program (UN-Habitat)-found that urban slums were growing faster than expected. The number of 
people living out their days in the squalor of a slum is almost one billion; one out of every three 
city dwellers, a sixth of the world’s population. Without radical changes, it is believed, that 
number could double in 30 years. By 2050, according to the report, there may be 3.5 billion slum 
dwellers, out of a total urban population of about six billion. Squatter settlements in urban areas 
are inevitable phenomena. As long as urban areas offer economies of different scales, as means 
for improving quality of living and environment for millions of poor in developing areas of the 
world, large cities will always continue to grow attracting migrants from rural and 
underdeveloped urban areas. This trend of rural-to-urban migration has led to the result of more 
squatting in urban regions, particularly in the last three decades. 
 
Squatter and slum settlements have formed mainly because of the inability of city governments to 
plan and provide affordable housing for the low-income segments of the urban population. Hence, 
squatter and slum housing is becoming the housing solution for this low-income urban population.  
 
3. Measures already taken: 
 
Many governments around the world have attempted to solve the problems of urban squatter 
settlements by clearing away old decrepit housing and replacing it with modern housing with 
much better sanitation. But in this case, slum clearance often took the form of eminent urban 
renewal projects, and often the former residents were prohibited in the renewed housing. 
Figure 3. The graph shows the expected increase of the world’s squatter population by 2050 
Source: UNCHS HABITAT 
 
 726 
According to many critics, forced slum clearances tend to ignore the social problems that cause 
the formation of slums.  
   National approaches to informal settlements in particular, have generally shifted from 
negative policies such as forced eviction or benign neglect recently. Approach that has been 
receiving considerable attention from various government and public authorities has been the 
"enabling" approach, where instead of taking a confrontationist attitude, governments have 
strived to create an enabling environment, under which people, using and generating their own 
resources, could find unique local solutions for their housing and shelter problems.  
 
   
   These include more positive policies, such as ‘self-help’ and ‘in situ’ upgrading, enabling, 
rights-based policies etc. Squatter settlements are increasingly seen by public decision-makers as 
places of opportunity, as there is abundant evidence of innovative solutions developed by the 
poor to improve their own living environment. In a word, different strategies have been adopted 
ever since, in these cases of improving squatter settlement conditions, like- micro credit, 
appropriate technology etc.  
   As a case study, the implementation of slum and squatter improvement programs in the river 
basins of Yogyakarta, Indonesia– government launched different slum improvement programs at 
that flood-prone squatter areas, rather than eviction of the whole living there. The programs 
included social rehabilitation, where the objective was to improve the settlements and cleanliness 
of the environment, renovating poor housings through a self-help mechanism (Kumorotomo,: 
1995). Program for socio-economic enhancement resulted into increasing household’s income 
and harmonized social relationship among residents. Community venture projects resulted into 
improving housing quality, which also provided funds for Vocational training project aimed at 
increasing the youth skills, urban settlement improvement project resulted into improving 
physical facilities, such as-drainage, footsteps, garbage bins and public toilets within the locality. 
The main theme of these projects was that all these programs were strongly participated by the 
local residents of the squatters of Yogyakarta, which resulted into such success. 
Figure 4 & 5. Self-help housing improvement program at Yogyakarta River Basin Squatter areas, 
Indonesia 
Source: Yayasan Pondok Rakyat, NGO 
 727 
3.1. Self-help Housing: 
 
Architects and designers, under different organizations that motivated and helped these poor 
people in building the settlements, were involved in construction of these self-help housings, 
where they guided more as trainers than designers. As case study, Habitat for Humanity, an 
international organization established in 1976, has built more than 300,000 houses, sheltering 
more than 1.5 million people in more than 3,000 communities worldwide, and they have 
motivated low-income people to build communities on self-help method. According to the 
organization ‘Architecture for Humanity’, many architects and designers work under this 
organization, holding voluntary role in construction of self-help housing in different regions. 
 
 
 
 
   Habitat for Humanity Ethiopia (HFHE) began construction in 1993 near the city capital Addis 
Ababa and has since expanded to build houses in 11 communities. Most houses are in urban and 
semi-urban areas. Families participating in a mutual self-help project perform approximately 
sixty-five percent of the construction labor on each other's homes under supervision of architects. 
The houses built in Ethiopia are mostly traditional style ‘Chika’ house, 85% of these houses in 
Ethiopia are made of mud and stick or thatch walls, which collapse easily. Homes are often 
cramped, with dirt floors, leaking roofs and no windows or doors, leaving their occupants 
vulnerable to adverse weather conditions, insects and rodents. Poor ventilation for inside cooking 
fires is a common cause of respiratory problems (Keller, Napier: 1995). Moreover, a staggering 
90% of the population has no access to decent sanitation facilities, and 73% of the population 
does not have safe drinking water, causing disease to run rampant.
 
   HFHE there constructed the settlements in ‘Chika’ style, from a number of different materials, 
including stabilized earth blocks, wood and fired bricks and all the necessity services and 
conditions were provided for living. Constructions of ‘Chika’ houses are affordable, quick and 
easy to build, and that was the reason to opt for this construction technique; some cost for 
Figure 6. Traditional ‘Chika’ house built by HFHE in Ethiopia 
 728 
construction was taken as loan from the organization, which is being paid in monthly affordable 
installations. These self-help housing programs are successful in sub-urban and rural housing 
areas, where people live in their own addresses. But providing self-help housing loans and 
construction help for urban squatter settlements, in many cases, has been a dilemma for squatters 
and the organizations, case studies show that.  
   Taking case study from Bangladesh, The Grameen Bank is a co-operative non-governmental 
association that first began a loan program for the rural poor to help them initiate income 
generating schemes. Then, with the success of the program, they decided to extend the bank's 
credit support to house-building in 1984, to build flood and water resistant modest houses. The 
Grameen Bank low-cost loan housing program, provides each borrower loans of approximately 
US$ 350 at 5% interest for basic housing scheme. Besides the money as loan, the borrower 
receives four concrete columns, a prefabricated sanitary slab and 26 corrugated iron roofing 
sheets at a much lower price. The structural system is based on a standard module, the pre-cast 
 
 
 
 
building materials are mass-produced off site, and the families construct the houses themselves. 
This housing scheme has been proven very successful in rural areas, the program is continuing 
with building over 30,000 new homes each year. According to ‘Grameen Bank Housing 
Programme’, The Grameen Bank Housing Project along with its success story of winning ‘World 
Habitat Award’ in 1998, still has no scheme for urban poor. Reason behind is, urban poor living 
in squatter settlements has no permanent address, liability of issuing loan on their name then 
comes to a question for the organization. And, on the other hand, in case of improving squatter 
settlements by the residents, it was found on a survey that, residents were unlikely to invest time 
and capital for settlements that they don’t own. As an outcome in rural areas of Bangladesh, 95.4 
per cent of the rural households with homes have ownership of the property compared to a figure 
of 71.5 per cent in urban areas, like Dhaka, in 2001. 
 
Figure 7. Grameen Bank Housing project 
 729 
3.2. Security of Tenure: 
 
Security of tenure is a critical factor contributing toward people's housing processes around the 
world. When communities of the urban poor do not have ownership rights to their settlement, the 
impulse toward improvement is decreased because there is no incentive to invest in something 
that they will eventually have no ownership right. Secure tenure to slum dwellers transforms their 
homes into a tangible asset. They can leverage their house to finance their work; they can rent out 
rooms for income support. Investment in community improvements and urban infrastructure 
build value into this tangible asset while improving the productivity of home-based enterprises.  
   But even so, securing tenure is not without its complexities and often leads to indirect 
eviction. For instance, the value of the tenure after development is sometimes so high that the 
resident is forced by its own poverty to pass it on and instead find a new informal settlement for 
himself. In this case, simply giving property ownership to urban or rural poor has created an 
increase in poverty by placing slum dwellers at the mercy of a voracious property market. 
Developers, with an eye toward entrepreneurial development, tempt the owner to resell or rent 
the new property. As a result, the owner sells the tenure which they received as a ‘gift’, then go 
back to live in slum again. One of the main goals to improve living for urban squatters should be, 
to create tenure situations that work for communities without subjecting them to increased market 
forces. For instance, slum settlements in Sao paolo, Brazil are called ‘Favelas’, more than 50% of 
people living in these settlements are self-employed informal workers, who $500 on average per 
month. Housing development project named Cingapura took place in some favelas during 1990’s, 
targeting these lower-income households. The concept was simple: rationalizing a favela by 
creating new-construction publicly funded housing, five or six-storey walkup flats, which are 
then sold to the residents who used to live there. Development Innovations Group working in Sao 
Paulo, Brazil, after construction, a typical Cingapura property cost was considered affordable 
only for the upper-income households of favelas. Therefore, the intended beneficiaries were not 
helped by this housing program. The units were also considered as larger than families need, and 
poorly suited for self-employed informal workers living in the settlement. As a result, those who 
moved back to the new constructed housing project were often quite different from those that 
moved away. 
 
4. Possible solutions: 
 
In our opinion, to address a solution for urban squatter settlements, firstly the squatters will have 
to work as a community, that can co-ordinate with their development plans along with 
Government and other organizations. Even by looking at the formation of this kind of settlements, 
they are the constructive results of collective efforts of a group or community. Development and 
maintenance of slums calls for on-going collective organization of land development, shelter-
making, obtaining basic services and ensuring social security. But, in case of improving their 
conditions, they have to be more organized and expanded as a group. Moreover, urban poor have 
to be aware and educated of their rights and how they can work along with each other, take the 
lead role in improving their situations. For example, regarding the complex tenure situation in 
urban regions, the urban squatters, formed as an organization or as a group, can seek the help of 
government to allot unused, vacant lands on their organization/ group’s name, on the condition 
that, the property would be developed as housing used by the squatters themselves. Although 
cities often claim that, there is no land left for the poor, this is almost always untrue. When poor 
 730 
people learn about their own cities and educate themselves about development plans, they can 
challenge this fallacy. 
 
4.1. Self-involvement in Design and Construction: 
 
The squatters can continue to play a central role in the design and construction of their homes and 
communities with the help of architects. Contemporary architectural practices and researches can 
set some design examples of low-cost ecological living settlements with basic living conditions 
provided (like-sanitation, water, electricity etc); these designs should be adapted to climates of 
different regions. The designs must fulfill the first condition of being affordable for urban 
squatters. Then, they should fulfill the criteria to be built in easy, traditional methods by the 
owners. Squatters have always been the architects, engineers and builders of their settlements, 
and here they can also play the role. The goal here is to use the knowledge and skills of the 
formal sector in complement to the skills of the informal sector- building quality houses without 
foreshadowing the participation of beneficiaries. 
 
4.2. Creating a ‘Sense of Belonging’ Through Design:    
                            
In most of the efforts taken to improve conditions of urban squatter settlements by architects and 
designers, there has been the eviction of squatters, and re-settling them in vertical, high-rise 
buildings. In most of the design of these buildings for squatters, their usual living pattern had 
been ignored; no open space for social activities and children had been provided. Moreover, 
dwellers were not involved to the process of the development. So, as a result, no ‘sense of 
belonging’ worked for those urban squatters on those settlements. For example, both Britain and 
France responded to housing shortages after the Second World War by constructing low quality,  
 
 
 
 
 Figure 8. Post-World war II social housing in Britain 
Source: Ollie Harrop, Bartlett Park, Poplar, UK 
 731 
High rise blocks. The consequence of this decision is that horizontal slums were replaced by 
"vertical ghettos". Even today, these high rise buildings constitute a serious problem to the people 
who live in them, because of increased insecurity and insularity, poor quality building materials, 
low standards and stigmatization of those areas. In a way, these vertical ghettos are often worse 
than the horizontal slums of previous decades as they lack a sense of community (Jencks, 1995).  
One of the common characteristic in slums is that these are consisted of vibrant communities of 
people and incorporate a whole range of social and community spaces and facilities within their 
living. For example, every slum has a niche; small shrine or temple, mosque or church, based on 
their common faith, where they meet and have social gatherings. For most of these informal 
activities of social interacting; children playing, shopping, chatting etc they use from the most 
minimal space for social interaction at the door step, the circulation and open spaces, to the 
optimum community spaces for various social and cultural activities. Visiting in almost all of the 
squatter settlements, one can find, lack of basic human living needs in these settlements, like- 
sanitation, drinking water, ventilation in living units, crime etc. which couldn’t become a  
 
 
hindrance to the social living existing among them.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
 
As ‘Dharavi’ was mentioned earlier, in the development plan of the slum by internationally-
renowned Architecture firm, Skidmore, Owings & Merrill (SOM), they plan to shift the slum by 
building blocks up to 14 storeys high. On payment of a transfer fee, slum dwellers could become 
eligible for a 300-sq ft flat in Dharavi. According to Maharashtra Housing and Area Development 
Authority (MHADA), they plan to use 4.5 lakh sq meters of built-up area from the total available 
10.5 lakh sq meters for rehabilitation of slum dwellers; the remaining area will be used to build 
affordable houses for outsiders, and for the total construction. MHADA also plans to incorporate 
the development with high-end commercial activities for the city’s well-off inhabitants around 
the area. Designing an urban environment that equally and adequately addresses the vibrant 
Indian culture and commerce along with the unique social structure of slum dwellers- is already a 
Figure 9. Outline image of Dharavi slum development, Mumbai by HOK Architects 
Source: www.dharavi.org 
 732 
tremendous challenge for them. One of their design ideas is to recreate a similar sense of 
community that is present now; the new apartment blocks will have wide corridors and 
communal areas that mimic the current shantytown's streets and where children can play. 
However, this $750 million-budgeted project faces resistance from residents who have been in 
their shanties for generations and doubt that SOM can improve their lot. Still the project has no 
publication, based on which we can have own judgment on their design. But the question should 
come, are these architects playing the ‘should-be’ role in their design process, which would 
support millions of squatter residents there?  
 
4.3. Housing Solution Through Design: 
 
In this point of designing high-rise settlements for urban poor, which the land value demands but 
contrary to their living attitudes, thoughts of Architect Laurie baker (1917-2007) could be 
mentioned. The architect was renowned for his initiatives in cost-effective energy-efficient 
architecture. In his writing, “What can we do with a slum?”, and he said in answer, “A great deal. 
We can "recycle" it; that is to say, we can build at the same site low-cost structures that  
 
 Figure 10. Architect Laurie baker’s idea on “What can we do with a slum?” 
Source: THE HINDU Vol. 14 :: No. 16 :: Aug. 9-22, 1997 
 733 
Accommodate an equal number of persons, and provide plenty of open space and other 
facilities.” He suggested simple-structured housing units in stepped tiers, up to four storeys, 
incorporated with open spaces for recreational activities and Gardens at different levels (Baker, 
1997). During the timeline when the article was published, contemporary architecture’s practice 
of sustainable green buildings was not that much in vogue, but the idea of Laurie Baker holds the 
contemporary position from designer’s point of view. Question is, on the question of re-designing 
squatter settlements as healthy living units in the 21st century cities, how the option of designing 
‘high-rise, stepped building structures with dwelling units in combination with open spaces’ for 
squatters is being considered? 
 
4.4. Use of Pre-fabricated Structure: 
  
In contemporary architectural practice, pre-fabrication of structures is much discussed in question 
of replacing regular housing units. Though the structures need to be assembled with help of 
experts, but they can act as a platform in solving the urban squatter problems for their advantages 
of cost savings for mass production, quick assembly, re-assembling in different locations and 
erection. Pre-fabricated housing unit has been a great help as many post-disaster shelter 
alternatives, as a case study we can talk of South-Asian tsunami attacks in Srilanka on 2005. 
 
 
 
 
 
These structures can be built as higher storey, which can arrange less ground-cover for the 
settlements (AFH, 2007).  
 
5. Concluding Remarks: 
 
From all these discussions, we can say that, squatter people always face insecurity regarding the 
ownership of the place where they live. But, if they are provided assurance from Government 
organizations for actively participating into improving their settlements, the living condition into 
Figure 11.  Pre-fabricated structure at Tsunami affected areas in Srilanka, 2005. 
Source: Habitat for Humanity  
 734 
these squatters can improve rapidly. Looking at the characteristics and formation of squatter 
settlements all around the world, the living units in the slums are perhaps, the best examples of 
the most optimum utilization of living space. Moreover, the squatters use minimum building 
materials to create their living Space, which are easily available, like- old and used tin sheets, 
timber rafters, joists and posts, country tiles, plastic sheets and other recycled materials. [12] Use 
of traditional building materials in these settlements that are easily accessible from nature is also 
a character representing these dwellings. What these people mostly need in order to improve their 
living into sustainable settlements are- monetary help from Government, organized participation 
into constructing self-help housing along with local and recycling building materials, designer’s 
participation into making the spaces more comfortable for living within the constraint of structure 
and space. Solving all these issues together can definitely result into sustainable housing 
settlement for squatters and slums. Question that comes is- can this way of living not become a 
typology itself, when provided with all the necessities of a healthy living? These dwellings are 
using optimum space and resources from nature, which is the indication of living sustainable. 
How can architects and designers play in these parts, converting these squatter settlements to 
provide as healthy living pattern, while keeping these positive characteristics intact in the 
renewed solution? It has been observed that, from the history of improving squatter settlements in 
different regions, wherever appropriate upgrading policies and healthy living designs have been 
put in place, have become increasingly socially cohesive; offering opportunities for security of 
tenure, local economic development and improvement of conditions of their lives. In 21st century 
living settlements around the world, when it is predicted, by 2050, two-thirds of humanity 
 
Figure 12.  The diagram shows our idea of sustainable solution for transforming slums and 
squatter settlements into sustainable living 
 735 
will be living in urban regions, and majority of them will be living in squatter settlements, then 
the question of providing adequate, healthy housing becomes a basic, emerging need for the 
increasing urban generations. This issue is not only about architect or designer’s role in providing 
proper housing; this is a complex issue addressing policies, economies and politics also. So, all 
these different dialogues have to be merged in transforming the squatter settlements as a way of 
healthy living in context of 21st century. Lastly, the paper ends up with this question: Will the 21st 
century be remembered as golden era of sustainable, socially conscious design, by providing an 
overall basic healthy living pattern for all? 
 
References: 
 
[1] Aldrich, Sandhu, ‘Housing the Urban Poor’, India: Zed, 1995  
 
[2] United Nations Human Settlements (UN-Habitat), ‘The Challenge of Slums Global Report 
2003’. 
 
[3] Booklet,workshop on ‘Dharavi and its Development’ by ‘Dharavi Development Authority’, 
2007  
 
[4] UNCHS [HABITAT] (1987), ‘Global Report on Human Settlements’. London: Oxford Press 
  
[5] Kumorotomo, W.; Darwin, M.; Faturochman, ‘The Implementation of Slum and Squatter 
Improvement Programs in the River Basins of Yogyakarta’, Populasi, Vol. 6, No.2, 1995 
 
[6] Written and published by Architecture for Humanity, ‘Design like You Give a Damn’, 2007  
 
[7] Kellet, Peter and Napier, Mark, ‘Squatter Architecture? A Critical Examination of Vernacular 
Theory and Spontaneous Settlement With Reference To South America and South Africa in 
Traditional Dwellings and Settlements’ Review, Vol. 6 No.2, 1995, pp.7-24. 
 
[8] Aga Khan Award for Architecture Publication, “Grameen Bank Housing Programme, Vari
ous Locations, Bangladesh”, 1989. 
 
[9] Smith, David, ‘Best Practices in Slum Improvement: The case of Sao Paulo, Brazil’: 
Development Innovations Group (DIG)  
 
[10] Jencks, Charles, ‘Modern Movements in Architecture: New Edition, Including a Postscript 
on Late- and Post- Modern Architecture’, Penguin, 1995  
 
[11] Baker, Laurie, “What can we do with a slum?” Source: THE HINDU 
Vol. 14: No. 16: Aug. 9-22, 1997.  
 
[12] Abrams, Charles (1966), ‘Squatter Settlements: The Problem and the Opportunity. Ideas and 
Methods,’ Office of International Affairs, Department of Housing and Urban Development 
 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
A STUDY ON THE BIODEGRADATION OF WASTEWATER FROM FOOD 
PROCESSING INDUSTRY ENRICHED WITH GLUCOSE, SUCROSE AND STARCH 
USING MODIFIED MANOMETRIC RESPIROMETER 
 
 
M.S. Rahman1, M.A. Islam2, M.S.A. Amin3 and M.S. Hossain4 
 
 
ABSTRACT: Oxygen Consumption Rate (OCR) is an important parameter for measuring 
biodegradation of organic substances. OCR of raw and synthetic wastewater of three types of 
carbohydrates named as glucose, sucrose and starch was monitored by a low-cost, locally 
fabricated differential manometric respirometer integrated with a thermobarometric unit. A yeast 
solution of 1gm/L was used as a biological agent to degrade the carbohydrates. During five days 
observation, glucose sample shows the maximum oxygen consumption of about 118 ml while for 
starch and sucrose, the values are 22 ml and 6 ml respectively. 
 
Keywords: Biodegradation, Oxygen consumption rate (OCR), Glucose, Sucrose, Starch, Yeast 
solution, Manometric respirometer. 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Biodegradation of wastewater is a very important phenomenon for treating the corresponding 
effluent properly (James, 2004). It can be characterized by oxygen consumption or more 
precisely by Oxygen Consumption Rate (OCR). Biodegradation is the process of breakdown and 
uptake of carbon compounds by the micro-organisms with the help of oxygen. Oxygen 
Consumption Rate (OCR) is defined as oxygen consumption per unit volume of sample and time 
that is consumed by micro-organism in effluent or wastewater. Throughout this research work 
biodegradation of wastewater leaving from food processing industry were observed. Food 
processing industries effluents largely contain glucose, sucrose, starch etc. carbohydrates. Hence, 
biodegradation characteristics of these carbohydrates were studied individually in presence of 
single micro-organism yeast. All the biodegradation experiments were conducted our low-cost, 
locally fabricated differential manometric respirometer integrated with a thermobarometric unit 
(Tebbutt et al., 1976) 
 
 
                                                        
1 Assistant Professor, CEE Department, SUST,Sylhet, Bangladesh. msr.cee@gmail.com. 
2 Professor, CEP Department, SUST,Sylhet, Bangladesh. mislam@sust.edu. 
3 Lecturer, CEP Department, SUST,Sylhet, Bangladesh. saikat_cep@yahoo.com 
4 Student  (B. Sc. Engg. Final year),CEP Department, SUST, Sylhet, Bangladesh.   
Shahadat_cep@yahoo.com 
737 
 
2. Materials and Method 
 
2.1. Sample preparation 
 
2.1.1. Wastewater sample from food processing industry 
Wastewater sample was collected from the sewage of the “FULKOLI”, a renowned food 
processing industry of Bangladesh. Sample was kept in a beaker for 1-2 hrs for settle down the 
large dirt particles. Then upper portion the sample was placed in the sample chamber of the 
respirometer. 
 
2.1.2. Synthetic sample 
Mother glucose sample was prepared by dissolving 1 gm glucose into 1 L water. Micro-organism 
solution was prepared by pouring 1 gm yeast into 1 L water. Then synthetic glucose sample was 
prepared by taking 35 ml mother glucose solution, 15 ml yeast solution and then diluted up to 
250 ml by distilled water. Similar procedure was followed for synthetic sucrose and starch 
solution just use only sucrose and starch instead of glucose. 
 
2.2. Differential manometric respirometer with thermobarometric unit 
 
2.2.1. Principle behind the respirometer 
Headspace oxygen is used to oxidize (degrade) different organic substances present in wastewater 
sample. Microorganisms present in the wastewater sample consume this headspace from the 
liquid phase i.e. dissolve oxygen(DO) to carry out their different metabolic activity like 
respiration, growth, decay etc. As a result, organic substances of wastewater degrade and carbon-
di-oxide (CO2) is produced as the following way: 
Organic substances + O2                CO2 + H2O + Energy (In presence of micro-
organism) 
Evolved CO2 was consumed by the KOH solution by the following reaction: 
CO2 + KOH                               K2CO3 + H2O  
The overall gas transfer mechanism is presented in Figure 1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1 Gas transfer mechanism in the wastewater (sample) chamber 
738 
 
As a result, pressure change throughout the sample chamber was indicated by the manometric 
fluid rise. A periodic measurement of manometric fluid movement throughout the five days 
indicates the total headspace oxygen consumption during five days. 
 
2.2.2. Design and feature of the respirometer 
Due to the temperature variation there is a vapor pressure change in the sample chamber of the 
respirometer. To minimize this effect a thermo barometric control chamber is attached at the other 
side of the sample chamber. As a result vapor pressure effect produced from the one chamber is 
cancelled out by the other chamber. Without this water bath is used in both sample and thermo 
barometric control chamber to maintain constant temperature during oxygen consumption 
monitoring experiment. Magnetic stirrers were used to improve the air contact with the 
wastewater. Schematic diagram of differential manometric respirometer with thermobarometric 
unit is shown in Figure 2. 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wastewater sample and same amount of distilled water acts as a blank were placed in sample 
chamber and thermo barometric chamber of the respirometer respectively. Due to the metabolic 
activity of the microorganisms of the wastewater oxygen (O2) was consumed and carbon-dioxide 
(CO2) was evolved. Evolved CO2 was consumed by the KOH solution. As a result, pressure 
change throughout the sample chamber was indicated by the manometric fluid rise. A periodic 
measurement of manometric fluid movement throughout the five days indicates the total 
headspace oxygen consumption during five days. 
 
3. Result and Discussion 
 
3.1. Wastewater from food processing industry 
 
Figure 3 shows the oxygen consumption profile of food processing industries wastewater during 
 
 
Wastewater 
Sample chamber 
Thermo barometric 
control chamber 
Control valve 
Magnetic bar 
Manometer 
 
Figure 2 Respirometer with thermobarometric control unit 
739 
 
five days period. Here we omit some data to obtain a standard curve which is represented by 
black one. Oxygen consumption profile represents that oxygen consumption reaches almost a 
saturated value which is 5.7 ml. That is almost complete biodegradation of food processing 
wastewater can be obtained by five days period. Ups and downs in the in oxygen consumption 
profile may be due to the diurnal nature of the algae presented in the wastewater sample. It is 
very natural that algae or other chlorophyll containing micro-organisms can present in the 
wastewater sample. These micro-organisms can use CO2, NO2 or other waste products to carry 
out their metabolic activity in absence of light. In presence of light they carry out photosynthesis 
and thus produce oxygen gas. As a result pressure increase in the sample chamber and there are  
periodic ups and downs in the oxygen consumption profile. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.2. Synthetic glucose sample 
 
Figure 4 shows the oxygen consumption profile of glucose solution in presence of micro-
organism yeast during five days period. After some initial adjustment period glucose sample 
consume total 118 ml oxygen during the observation period. Initial downward nature of the curve 
may be due to the adjustment of yeast with new glucose sample. Furthermore, this nature of the 
curve may also be the result of obtaining a dynamic equilibrium of oxygen between headspace 
environment and sample solution. After these initial conditions oxygen consumption reaches a 
saturated value (118 ml) which means that almost complete biodegradation of glucose can be 
obtained within five days with the help of yeast. The ups and downs throughout the curve may be 
due to evolution of some non specified gas which requires further study.   
 
3.3. Synthetic sucrose sample 
 
Figure 5 shows the oxygen consumption profile of sucrose solution. It shows the total oxygen 
consumption is 6 ml during five days period and it increases further. That is complete 
 
 
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
-2000 0 2000 4000 6000 8000
O
xy
ge
n 
C
on
su
m
pt
io
n(
m
l)
Time(min)
Saturated 
value of OC 
represents the 
almost 
complete 
biodegradation 
of wastewater  
Due to the 
presence of 
chlorophyll 
containing 
organism 
 
Figure 3 Time vs. Oxygen Consumption curve for wastewater from food processing industry 
 
740 
 
biodegradation of sucrose needs more than five days in presence of yeast. There is also existence 
of initial adjustment period which represented by red circle in the curve. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.3. Synthetic sucrose sample 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Time vs. Oxygen Consumption curve for sucrose solution 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.4. Synthetic starch solution 
 
Total oxygen consumption of synthetic starch solution is 22 ml during five days period. Here 
initial adjustment period longer up to 20 hrs. Then there is rapid biodegradation of starch occurs 
up to 45 hrs followed by a saturated value of oxygen consumption. After that, we expected almost 
zero vale of oxygen consumption indicates complete biodegradation of starch but we proved 
wrong in some extent. Because oxygen consumption increases further with some unusual nature. 
This unusual nature claims further study. 
 
 
-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140
O
xy
ge
n 
C
on
su
m
pt
io
n(
m
l)
Time(hr)
Requires further 
study 
Initial 
adjustment 
Saturated value 
of OC indicates 
almost complete 
biodegradation 
of glucose 
 
Figure 4 Time vs. Oxygen Consumption curve for glucose solution 
 
 
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140
O
xy
ge
n 
C
on
su
m
pt
io
n(
m
l)
Time(hr)
Increasing value 
of OC indicates 
sucrose sample 
requires further 
treatment 
beyond 5 days 
Initial 
adjustment 
period 
Figu
re 5 Time vs. Oxygen Consumption curve for sucrose solution 
741 
 
           
 
                 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4. Conclusion 
 
Oxygen consumption can be used as an alternative of BOD5 which at present used as an 
important parameter in most Wastewater Treatment Plants (WTPs) for water quality management. 
Because Oxygen consumption can provide much information concerning treatment plant 
performance, wastewater characteristics, degradability of special concentrated streams as well as 
parameters needed for mathematical models, in order to predict possible optimizations of a 
treatment plant. In addition it is useful for daily operation control. However, most largely used 
BOD5 has some limitations which affect the WTPs efficiency and activity largely. Because the 
five-day BOD test was developed over a hundred years ago in England and the length of the test 
period was chosen based on the maximum time required for any British river to flow from its 
source to the sea. Without this BOD5 reveals only five days Oxygen (O2) consumption of 
wastewater; it does not provide any information about biodegradability of organic substances. 
This Oxygen (O2) consumption may be occurred from after one day or two days or may be after 
three days of experiment (Katri, 2009),. It may not longer up to five days if corresponding 
wastewater sample contains readily biodegradable organic substances. Otherwise, wastewater 
sample can continue its biodegradation beyond five days if it contains slowly biodegradable 
organic substances. As a result, there are much possibilities of oxygen deficiency during the 
BOD5 test. This can be overcome by dilution of wastewater sample. But a poor choice of dilution 
can produce a lack of a part of the BOD data thus causing the test to be imprecise. Conventionally, 
BOD5 is measured with universal methods, such as iodometric titration or the oxygen electrode, 
which are usually time-consuming as well as laborious, due to the necessary oxygen content 
measurement of the sample before and after the incubation period. Often, the procedures used to 
derive results from these tests often impart environmental conditions that can change the 
physiology of organisms such that they are not representative of the physiology in the full scale 
system that they are being evaluated. In addition, the information obtained from this tool is not 
available in time to make timely operational decisions. Due to these limitations BOD5 test can be 
 
 
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140O
xy
ge
n 
C
on
su
m
pt
io
n(
m
l)
Time(hr)
Almost 
complete 
biodegradatio
n of starch 
Requires 
further study 
Endogenous 
phase of yeast 
 
Figure 6 Time vs. Oxygen consumption curve for starch solution 
742 
 
replaced by respirometric oxygen consumption test. Oxygen consumption increasingly is 
employed to obtain bio-kinetic characteristics, and it is considered one of the most important 
information sources. Oxygen consumption test is a simple, readily available, and familiar tool 
that can deliver information to monitor, optimize and trouble shoot of biological treatment 
processes (Roppola K, et al, 2007). Based on this parameter operations staff tries to obtain some 
snapshot and understanding of the biological processes occurring in the wastewater and activated 
sludge system. In addition, operations staff often tries to infer the physiological state (reaction 
potential and stability, instability) of bacteria from this system parameter. Using this approach 
provide definitive understanding of bacterial health, populations, their treatment ability, and their 
stability  
 
Acknowledgements 
 
This study has been supported by the research funds of Shahjalal University of Science and 
Technology and Centre for Environmental Process Engineering, CEP, Sylhet, Bangladesh. M.S. 
Rahman acknowledges NSICT fellowship awarded by Ministry of Science and Information & 
Communication Technology, Government of Bangladesh.  
 
References 
 
Jay B. Hill, et al, 1998, Diagnosing The Biomass, New Jersy EFFLUENT, PP 30-36. 
Jerry Y. C. Huang and Meng-Dawn Cheng,(1984), Measurement and New Applications of  
  Oxygen Uptake Rates in Activated Sludge Processes., Journal of Water Pollution Control 
  Federation, Vol. 56, No.3, Part I, pp. 259-265. 
James C. Young, et.al, [2004]. “Respirometry for Environmental Science and Engineering”, SJ      
Enterprises, USA, pp 1-1. 
Katri Roppola (2009), Environmental applications of manometric respirometric methods. Faculty 
of Science, Department of Chemistry, University of OULU.  
Metcalf and Eddy, (2005), Wastewater Engineering, Tata McGraw-Hill Edition. 
Marinette Hagman and Jes la Cour Jansen, (2007), Oxygen uptake rate measurements for 
application at wastewater treatment plants, VATTEN 63:131–138. Lund. 
Roppola K, Kuokkanen T, Nurmesniemi H, Rämö J, Pöykiö R, Prokkola H (2006), Comparison 
study of manometric respirometric test and common chemical methods in the determination of 
BOD7 in a pulp and paper mill's wastewaters. Journal of Automated Methods and 
Management in Chemistry, 2006, Article ID 90384: 1-5. 
Roppola K, et al, 2007, Comparison study of different BOD tests in the determination of BOD(7) 
evaluated in a model domestic sewage, J Autom Methods Manag Chem., 2007:3976. 
S. Marsili-Libellia, et al, 2002, Accuracy analysis of a respirometer for activated sludge dynamic 
modeling, Water Research, 36, pp 1181–1192.  
Tebbutt Thy and Berkun M, (1976) Respirometric determination of BOD. Water Research 10: 
613–617. 
743 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
COMPARATIVE LABORATORY STUDY ON HYDRAULIC PERFORMANCES OF 
SANDBAGS AND GABIONS 
 
 
Md. Nabi Newaz Khan1, Md. Shamim Haider2 and Aysha Akter3 
 
 
ABSTRACT: Sand filled bags (sandbags) and rock/gravel filled wire containers (gabions) are 
generally used in riverbank or coastline protection against hydraulic forces. Due to lack of stones 
and abundance of river induced sand, recently Bangladesh has adopted long term sandbag 
protections for major river banks; for instance Jamuna and Meghna as found elsewhere around 
the world. To ensure revetment stability, details understanding on hydraulic nature of sandbags 
and gabions protection are vital. The aim of this study is to investigate the hydraulic performance 
of sandbags and gabions in an open channel flume. In the hydraulic laboratory, Department of 
Civil Engineering, CUET, a series of experiments were carried out in this 1 m revetment using 
both construction materials (i) model sandbags and (ii) model gabions. These experiments 
showed Fr between 0.02 to 0.03 both sandbag and gabion revetment remained stable. However, 
in higher Fr, i.e. 0.05 to 0.10, stable revetments (stream wise) of gabion and sandbags were 88% 
and 68% respectively. To overcome instability in the downstream of the sandbag revetment, an 
additional part of gabions along with the sandbag revetment was also tested. The expected 
hydraulic performances outcomes of this study would help in decision making for using discrete 
elements for example gabions and sandbags in riverbank or costal protection works. 
 
Key words: Sandbags; Gabions; Revetment; Froude number; Hydraulic flume; Water level;   
  Flow rate  
 
 
1. Background 
 
Rock/gravel filled wire containers (gabions) normally used in coastline protection works, for 
instance in Saemangeum project in South Korea (Beekx, 2006). The field performances of 
gabions strengthen the bank side against wave action and high water velocity. Sandbags are also 
being used against high water flow in coastal protection works (Hornsey et al. 2011). Due to lack 
of stones but abundance of river induced sand, recently sandbag protections for long term major 
river banks has adopted in Bangladesh; for example Jamuna and Meghna as found elsewhere 
around the world (Oberhagemann and Hossain, 2010) (Figure 1). Bag displacement assumed as a 
                                                        
1Final year, Bachelor of Science, Department of Civil Engineering, Chittagong University of Engineering 
& Technology (CUET), Chittagong 4349, Bangladesh. 
2Final year, Bachelor of Science, Department of Civil Engineering, Chittagong University of Engineering 
& Technology (CUET), Chittagong 4349, Bangladesh. 
3Assistant Professor, Department of Civil Engineering, Chittagong University of Engineering &         
Technology (CUET), Chittagong 4349, Bangladesh. aysha_akter@yahoo.com 
744 
 
result of different hydraulic combinations of water velocity, water level and physical composition 
of sandbag itself. Performances of gabions studied, perhaps there is no such study covered to 
compare with the sandbags. However, for details understanding on hydraulic nature of sandbags 
and gabions protection, an experimental program has been launched in Hydraulic Laboratory, 
Department of Civil Engineering, Chittagong University of Engineering & Technology (CUET). 
 
The aim of this study is to investigate the hydraulic performance of sandbags and gabions in an 
open channel flume.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A = Stable geobag protection and B = Geobags prone to displacement 
 
Figure 1: Sand filled geotextile bag (geobag) protection in Jamuna River (Sirajganj, 2011) 
 
 
2. Experimental Setup 
 
The open channel hydraulic flume is 5 m long, 80 mm wide and 250 mm high with 1 in 500 slope. 
In ordinary condition the generated flow in this flume is of subcritical nature (i.e. Fr = 0.39 < 1). 
A test section of 1 m revetment was constructed in quasi-uniform flow zone (observed in 1.5 m to 
2.5 m from the flume headwater). A series of experiments were carried out in this 1 m revetment 
using both construction materials (i) model sandbags and (ii) model gabions. In both cases 
several experiments were carried out to evaluate their performances at varying water levels in the 
flume. As sandbag revetment showed better performances while there is a protected downstream, 
an additional test section of gabions was also studied. At least three measurements in streamwise 
length direction (i.e., upstream, middle and downstream of the revetment) were obtained for each 
cases in the test section. 
745 
 
2.1. Model sandbags 
 
A total of 150 model sandbags individually weighting 0.05 kg were prepared for laboratory 
experiments (Figure 2a). The sandbags (using polyester fabric and Sylhet sand of Fineness 
Modulus 2.74) were of rectangular size 70 mm × 45 mm. 
 
2.2. Model gabions 
 
150 model gabions individually weighting 0.05 kg were engaged in laboratory experiments using 
nylon mesh and stone of d50 = 22 mm (Figure 2b). 
 
2.3. Model gabions followed by model sandbags 
 
To strengthen the downstream of the sandbag revetment, prolonged length has provided using 
gabions (Figure 2c). Here in addition to 1 m sandbags revetment, two different gabion revetments 
were tested for detecting sufficient downstream protection, i.e., (i) 0.30 m using 46 gabions and 
(ii) 0.10 m using 15 gabions. 
 
 
3. Methodology 
 
Each experiment was carried out through recording of water level, water flow rates, 
displacements of protective materials and their physical properties. 
 
3.1. Hydraulic parameters 
 
Revetments of single type protective materials were tested under different water level and flow 
conditions. In preliminary experiments, while comparing the performances of sandbags and 
gabions in a meter long test section, both of the downstream protective materials started early 
movements. The sandbag revetment showed promising stability in higher Froude number except 
the downstream bag instability. To strengthen the sandbag revetment downstream, additional 
gabion revetment has provided and the hydraulic parameters were also recorded. 
 
3.2. Revetment physical properties 
 
In every experiment run, the physical properties of the revetments were recorded. This also 
comprised of number of protective material displacements from the test section, settling distance 
of these materials and the changes in physical properties of the protective materials. 
 
 
746 
 
 
(a) Revetment using model sandbags 
 
(b) Revetment of model gabions 
 
(c) Revetment comprised of model sandbags (1 m) and gabions (0.30 m) 
 
Figure 2: Revetment setup in the open channel hydraulic flume 
 
 
 
 
 
747 
 
4. Results 
 
Initial settlement of the protective material has observed while experiments were carried out. The 
sandbags revetment was stable in lower water flow (Figure 3). Similarly gabion revetment 
remained almost unchanged in low water flow. Thus, these experiments showed both sandbag 
and gabion revetment remained stable while Froude number (Fr) was in a range of 0.02 to 0.03. 
However, in higher Fr, i.e. 0.05 to 0.10, stable revetments (streamwise) of gabion and sandbags 
were 88% and 68% respectively. Sandbag revetment was strengthening by providing gabions in 
downstream, this composition showed: 
i. less displacements in downstream sandbags, 
ii. for a the 0.10 m gabion protection in downstream indicated a visual difference in flow 
filed over sandbag and gabions; and  
iii. 0.30 m gabion protection provided better stability in sandbag - gabion revetment than 
the 0.10 m length. 
 
To notify the physical changes of sandbags, individual bags were observed at the end of 
experiment while those experiments were carried out using dry sandbags. Due to different in 
water flow action, the sand movements appeared in various categories (Figure 4). Using 
laboratory classification approach, a preliminary attempt was made to indicate the physical 
changes in field protecting geobags (Figure 5). Intensive studies are needed for details hydraulic 
explanation on this sandbag physical appearance. 
 
 
50
60
70
80
90
100
0 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.1 0.12 0.14 0.16
%
 o
f  
st
ab
le
 r
ev
et
m
en
t 
Froude number (of flowing water over revetment)
Sandbags
Gabions
Sandbags & Gabions
 
 
Figure 3: Percentage of stable revetment under different flow rate 
748 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Position of the sandbags in revetment during experiment 
(Upstream Zone, UZ = one-third of the stream wise length; Mid Zone, MZ = From upstream 
two-third of the stream wise length; and Downstream Zone,  
DZ = one-third of the downstream wise length) 
1: Upstream (stream wise); 2: Topmost layer; 3 & 4: Displaced bag in UZ; 
5 - 8: Displaced bag in MZ; and 9 & 10: Downstream: 
 
Figure 4: Physical changes in sandbags at the end of experiment 
 
749 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5: Identification of physical changes due to sand movement in field bags based on 
laboratory experiments 
 
 
5. Conclusions 
 
From laboratory experiments following conclusions can be drawn: 
 Hydraulic parameter and sand movement in sandbags have strong influence on revetment 
stability; and 
 Sandbag showed rather reasonable performance in higher water flow with additional 
gabions in revetment downstream. 
 
Further studies need to consider: 
 Hydraulic explanations of sand movement in sandbags during different phase of 
experiments; 
 Experiments in wider open channel flume to represent transverse movement of protective 
materials due to flowing water on revetment; 
 Long term stability of revetment in longer period experiments.  
 
It is envisaged that the laboratory findings would provide helpful information for existing 
riverbank erosion in Halda River; details can be found in Khan et al. (2012). 
 
 
750 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
The authors are grateful for the financial, laboratory and logistic supports of the department of 
Civil Engineering, Chittagong University of Engineering and Technology (CUET). For field 
survey and information collection supports from Engineer Rezaul Karim, Jamuna - Meghna River 
Erosion Mitigation (JMREM) Project, Pabna, Bangladesh, are highly appreciable. 
 
 
References 
 
Beekx , R. H. P. A. (2006). Gabion Stability. Final report, TU Delft, Civil Engineering and 
Geosciences, Hydraulic Engineering Section. Available on: http://repository.tudelft.nl 
(Retrieved on 29 December 2011) 
Hornsey, W. P., Carley J. T., Coghlan I. R., Cox, R. J. (2011). Geotextile sand container shoreline 
protection systems: Design and application. Geotextiles and Geomembranes, 29 (4):425-
439. doi:10.1016/j.geotexmem.2011.01.009 
Oberhagemann, K., Hossain, M. M. (2010). Geotextile bag revetments for large rivers in 
Bangladesh. Geotextiles and Geomembranes In Press, Corrected Proof. 
doi:10.1016/j.geotexmem.2010.12.003 
Khan, M. N. N., Haider, M. S. and Akter, A. (2012).  Cost effective bank protection for Halda 
River. 1st International Conference on Civil Engineering for Sustainable Development 
(ICCESD-2012). KUET, Khulna, Bangladesh. Paper ID 271. (Accepted). 
 
 
 
751 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION ON HEAT TRANSFER THROUGH INFILL WALL 
 
 
Md. Zahidul Islam1, Md. Mehedi Iqbal2 and Md. Harunur Rashid 3  
 
 
ABSTRACT:  Infill walls are generally used in framed structures. The thermal properties of 
infill walls help for selecting the proper wall of a building. Different materials used to make infill 
wall of a building have different effects in maintaining the room environment. In this thesis work 
four types of infill walls made by brick, ferrocement, ferrocement with corksheet & corksheet 
between two layers of ferrocement are used. The room models are made maintaining a scale of 
1:6 providing minimum ventilation facilities. It is observed that the ferrocement wall is found to 
be transferring more heat than brick and other type of walls. Infill wall made with ferrocement 
with corksheet have good performance to resist heat transfer from the ambient environment and 
this type of wall is economically viable than other walls. 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Brick is an important and available material with complex properties and has a great application 
to make the wall of a building. Nowadays considering the economic and comfortable reasons 
other types of materials are used to make the wall of a building. The heat transfer problems are 
arranged in the work chronologically for practical use in building energy design and heat transfer 
calculations. The work can be used as a source of information for teaching heat transfer in 
buildings. 
   Heat is the energy transferred from one body or system to another as a result of a difference in 
temperature. Heat always migrates from the hotter object to the cooler object, never the other way 
around. Heat is transferred by three methods: conduction, convection, and radiation. Conduction 
requires the physical contact of two objects. In the case of a wall, heat is conducted through the 
layers within the wall from the warmer side to the cooler side. Convection is heat transfer due to 
fluid or airflow. A common example is when warm air rises or cools air falls on a wall’s inside 
surface, inducing air movement. Heat is transferred by radiation when surfaces exchange 
electromagnetic waves, such as light, infrared radiation, UV radiation or microwaves. Radiation 
does not require any fluid medium or contact, but does require an air gap or other  
_________________________________ 
1Under-graduate Student, Department of Civil Engineering, Khulna University of Engineering & 
Technology (KUET), Khulna, Bangladesh. divertedmails@gmail.com 
2Project Engineer, Comfort Living Ltd., Banani,Dhaka, Bangladesh. mmiqbal@gmail.com  
3Associate Professor, Department of Civil Engineering, Khulna University of Engineering & Technology 
(KUET), Khulna, Bangladesh 
 
752 
 
transparent medium between the surfaces exchanging radiation.  
   Buildings are more than just housings; they should provide us comfort and suitable conditions 
for our health. These conditions depend on the following factors: The room-temperature - optimal 
values 20°C to 22°C, 68°F to 71.6°F. The temperature at the inner surface of the enclosing walls, 
which should be at least 16°C to 18°C, 60.8°F to 64.4°F in order to avoid the feeling of (cold) 
draft. Generally that the wall should not be more than 3°C, 5.4°F warmer than the room in 
summer and not less than 3°C, 5.4°F colder than the room in winter. 
   How these walls hold or store thermal energy – a low thermal capacity for example would 
lead to high variations in temperature, the inside of the building would be to hot at daytime and to 
cold at night. It can be said that the building has a certain heat buffering function. This is closely 
linked to the temperature-amplitude-quotient, which is the relation between the variations in 
temperature outside and inside a building. The amplitude of variation inside should be lower than 
the one outside which means that the building should protect us from the extreme temperatures 
that are present outside. In addition the variation inside should have a delay on the one 
outside .The effects of this quotient are the most noticeable in summer.  
   A floor-temperature between 22°C and 24°C, 71.6°F and 75.2°F is ideal. This ideal 
temperature also depends on the duration of the stay in the room. A low temperature is only 
suitable if the users do not stay longer than about 3hrs in the room. In any case it should be higher 
than 15°C, 59°F. The divergence from the ideal room temperature is due to the fact that our feet 
are the only part of our body that is in contact with an element of the building. 
    
 
2. Methodology 
 
 Constructed different structures containing minimum ventilation system (i.e. window and 
door opening). 
 Different infill materials were used to construct the infill wall panels. 
 A closed chamber was constructed to maintain the tested temperature surrounding the 
wall panel. 
 Thermal sensors were used to collect data for examine the Heat Transfer Properties of 
different wall panels in the enclosed area. 
 Lees and Charlton method was used to measure the conductivity of different wall 
components. 
 Costing of individual wall panel were examined. 
 Finally analyzed and compared the data of two different structures and get the best result 
of their usage. 
 
2.1. Reduction of Heat Transfer with Insulation 
 
It is often tried to minimize the amount of heat transferred between the inside and outside walls 
of homes and buildings. Thermal insulation works help to increase the comfort level. By reducing 
the amount of heat loss and heat gain through walls, floors and ceilings, thermal insulation helps 
keep the home cool in summer and warm in winter. The effectiveness of thermal insulation can 
be measured by its R-Value. The higher the R-Value, the more effective the insulation is in 
reducing the heating and cooling costs.  The building industry has devised a ranking, or R-value, 
of the insulating properties of various materials based on their thickness and their thermal 
conductivity. The larger is the R-value, the better the insulating property of the building material. 
753 
 
TheR-valueof insulation is the ratio of the thickness of the wall to the thermal conductivity K of 
the material, as shown in Equation (1). 
 
R=L/K----------------------------------------(1) 
 
Where 
R=The R value of the material 
L= Thickness (meters or inches) 
K= The thermal conductivity (J/s m ℃) 
 
Minimization of heat transfer is an important factor as it helps to maintain increased room 
temperature in winter season and comfortable environment in summer season.In cases where it is 
need to minimize transfer of thermal energy; all three kinds of heat transfer are taken into account. 
   To understand how to limit heat transfer by conduction, let consider a physical model for the 
process, such as heat flow through a wall. The higher the thermal conductivity of the material, the 
faster heat would be transferred. However, thermal conductivity is a property of the material, and 
also expected the shape and amount of the material to have an effect on heat transfer. 
   It is reasonable to expect that heat flow through a wall would increase as the area of the wall 
is increased and would decrease as the thickness of the wall is increased. It is also reasonable that 
the difference in temperature between the sides of the wall should make a difference: the greater 
the temperature difference, the faster heat is expected to flow. These expectations can be written 
in equation form, as shown in equation (2) 
 
Heat flow= energy transferred/ thickness =K A (Thot−Tcold)/ L-------------------(2) 
 
Where 
K= the thermal conductivity (J/s m ℃) 
A = the cross sectional area (meters2) 
T= temperature (℃) 
L= thickness (meters) 
 
 
Figure 1 Heat flow through wall. 
 
 
 
754 
 
2.2. Measurement of Thermal Conductivity 
 
Thermal conductivity is the quantity of heat flow in a unit time through a unit area of a substance 
caused by a unit thermal gradient. Thermal conductivity K is a constant indicating how easily 
heat is transferred through a substance. Heat transfer through a surface, such as a wall, can be 
minimized by reducing the area or the thermal conductivity of the wall or by increasing the 
thickness of the wall. 
   The quantity of heat flowing through bad conductors is very small. In measuring their 
conductivity long bars should not be used as in the case of metals because it will not be possible 
to measure the small rate of flow accurately even with a reasonably high temperature difference 
between the ends. Again the flow of heat conduction is directly proportional to the cross sectional 
area A and inversely proportional to the thickness d. It is therefore advantageous to use the 
substance in the form of a thin plate of large area and small thickness so that the quality of heat 
flowing is conductivity measured. One of the various methods employed is Lee’s and Charlton’s 
method. 
 
2.3. Preparation Of Specimen 
2.3.1. Brick Specimen 
At first good quality of bricks were taken. Then a mortar using cement and sand ratio of 1:3 was 
prepared. A box type brick structure 20”x20” was made providing thickness of the wall 2.75”. 
Curing process was done for 3 days. 
 
Figure 2 Brick specimen 
2.3.2. Ferrocement Specimen 
Six piece of 22”x22” size and six piece of 18”x18” size wire mesh were taken. Prepared a mortar 
using cement and shylet sand ratio, 1:2 and slabs were made using wire mesh with mortar 
containing thickness of the slab 1”. Curing process was done for 3 days. The slabs were jointed to 
made specimen. The joint gaps were closed by providing mortar at gap space. Some holes were 
provided in the ferrocement structure for minimum ventilation facilities. 
Figure 3 Ferrocement specimen 
755 
 
2.3.3. Ferrocement Specimen with Insulating Material 
An insulating material (cork sheet) having 1” thickness was provided with the inner wall of large 
box type structure. An insulating material (cork sheet) having 1” thickness was provided with 
double layer inside the large box type structure and small box type structure was inserted into the 
larger one. 
 
 
Figure 3 Ferrocement specimens with insulating material 
 
2.3.4. Enclosed Area 
The enclosed area was built by wood, G.I. sheet and steel frames. Specimens were kept in this 
area in controlled temperature. A partial view of the enclosed area is shown in figure 4. 
 
 
Figure 4: Enclosed Area 
 
2.3.5. Instrument for Temperature Measurement 
Thermal sensors are used for taking the experimental data. To measure temperature, three nos. of 
thermal sensors were placed in the closed area and in the specimens. 
 
2.4. Procedure 
 
 At first the experimental specimen were placed in the enclosed area. 
 Two heaters were placed between two specimens. 
 Two thermal sensors were inserted into two specimens. 
756 
 
 A thermal sensor used to measure the temperature of enclosed area. 
 Heat controlled at a certain limit by switching off and switching on the heater. 
 The temperature was taken at 5 minutes interval for at least 9 hours. 
 Lee’s and Charlton’s method used for the conductivity test of materials. 
 
 
3. Results & Discussion 
 
3.1. Graphical Representation of the Results 
 
 
Figure 5 Temperature of enclosed area, ferrocement & brick specimen with respect to time. 
 
 
Figure 6 Temperature of enclosed area, ferrocement with corksheet & brick specimen with 
respect to time. 
 
757 
 
 
 
Figure 7 Temperature of enclosed area, brick specimen & corksheet among two layer of   
ferrocement with respect to time. 
 
 
Figure 8 Temperature of brick specimen, ferrocement specimen, ferrocement with corksheet & 
corksheet among two layer of ferrocement with respect to time. 
 
758 
 
 
 
Figure 9 Temperature of various specimens (brick, ferrocement (FC), and ferrocement with cork 
sheet (FC + CS), and cork sheet between two layers of ferrocement (FC+CS+FC)) and enclosed 
area (EA) with respect to time. 
3.2. Thermal Conductivity Test 
 
The detailed data and results for measuring the thermal conductivity are given below. 
3.2.1. Thermal Conductivity of Brick 
         Table 1 Time-temperature record of A (Upper disc) & B (Lower disc). 
 
Time(min) Upper disc θ1(℃) Lower disc θ2(℃) 
0 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
60 
93 
93.5 
93.5 
93.5 
93.5 
93.5 
93.5 
93.5 
93.5 
93.5 
26 
41 
52 
60.5 
64 
67 
68.5 
70 
71 
71 
71 
 
759 
 
 
 
Figure 10 Brick specimen for conductivity measurement 
 
Calculation of conductivity for brick specimen is as follows: 
Thickness of specimen =9.5mm 
Diameter of the specimen, D=9.5cm 
Cross section of the specimen, A=70.88 cm 
Mass of the lower disc, M=600gm 
Specific heat of the disc material, S=0.089 
Rate of fall of temperature, dθ/dt=1.07 
Thickness of the specimen, d=0.98cm 
θ1=93.5℃ 
θ2=71℃ 
Thermal Conductivity, k= Msd (dθ/dt)/A (θ1-θ2) =0.0351 cal/cm-sec 
 
 
 
Figure 11 Graph of temperature vs time during cooling 
 
 
 
760 
 
3.2.1. Thermal Conductivity of Ferrocement 
 
Table 2 Time-temperature record of A (Upper disc) & B (Lower disc). 
 
Time(min) Upper disc θ1(℃) Lower disc θ2(℃) 
0 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
55 
60 
65 
70 
75 
80 
85 
60 
93.5 
94 
94 
94 
94 
94 
94 
94 
94 
94 
94 
94 
94 
94 
94 
94 
94 
33 
36 
43.5 
50 
55 
58.5 
61.5 
63.5 
65 
66 
67 
68.5 
69 
69.5 
69.5 
70 
70 
70 
 
 
 
 
Figure 12 Ferrocement specimen for conductivity measurement 
 
761 
 
Calculation of conductivity for ferrocement specimen is as follows: 
Thickness of specimen=13.33mm 
Diameter of the specimen, D=11.8cm 
Cross section of the specimen, A=109.36cm2 
Mass of the lower disc, M=930gm 
Specific heat of the disc material, S=0.089 
Rate of fall of temperature, dθ/dt=1.33 
Thickness of the specimen, d=13.33mm 
θ1=94℃, θ2=70℃ 
Thermal Conductivity, k= Msd (dθ/dt)/A (θ1-θ2) =0.0558 cal/cm-sec 
 
 
Figure 13 Graph of temperature vs time during cooling. 
 
3.3. Cost Analysis 
 
Table 3 Cost analysis of different Infill wall 
 
Infill wall Cost/sft 
Brick wall 34 
Ferrocement wall 30 
Ferrocement wall with corksheet 34 
Cork sheet between two ferrocement layers 64 
 
   From the result of the experiment it has been seen that the Ferrocement wall transfers more 
heat than brick wall at the same ambient temperature. If insulating material like cork sheet is 
attached with ferrocement wall and compared with the brick wall, the difference of transfer of 
heat among these walls are very small. When cork sheet material used between two layers of 
ferrocement wall, the transfer of heat is less than brick wall. In this case the conductance of heat 
from inner side to outer side of the specimen is almost negligible. 
762 
 
By controlling the temperature at 45℃ at the outer side of the specimen for five hours the 
temperatures of the inner side of the specimens are 37 ℃, 32℃, 29℃, 22℃ for Ferrocement 
specimen, Brick specimen, Ferrocement with cork sheet & cork sheet  among two layer of 
Ferrocement  specimen respectively. For brick and ferrocement specimen the conductivity is 
found 0.0351 cal/cm-sec and 0.0558 cal/cm-sec respectively. 
 
 
4. Conclusion 
 
The thermal properties of infill wall materials are not well studied. Heat transfer through a wall 
increased with the increasing of the thermal conductivity of the wall material. Heat transfer 
through a wall reduced by increasing the thickness of the wall or using thermal insulator. 
In this work, the thermal conductivity of conventional brick wall exhibits 37% lower than the 
ferrocement wall.  
   The heat transfer of ferrocement wall is 45% higher than the masonry brick wall. And 
ferrocement wall with cork sheet exhibits 9% lower heat transfer capacity than brick wall. 
In case of ferrocement wall the cost is 13% lower than brick wall. The cost of ferrocement wall 
with cork sheet is similar to brick wall. 
   The use of ferrocement wall with insulating material can be a good alternative of brick wall 
because it reduces the heat transfer and provides larger space. 
 
 
References 
 
Haydary. J. (2009),Heat transfer in building construction. Institute of Chemical and 
Environmental Engineering, Faculty of Chemical and Food Technology, Slovak University 
of Technology, pp. 75-78. 
Ross. C. (2008), Principles of heat transfer. WSU Extension Energy Program. March 2008. 
Aziz. M. A.(1995), A Text Book of Engineering Materials. Bangladesh University of Engineering 
& Technology, Dhaka, Bangladesh 
Brown. W. P. and Wilson. A. G. (1962), The Thermal Conductivity of Brick Walls, National 
research council of Canada, pp. 155-188.   
Greepala.V. and Nimityongskul. P. (2006), Structural integrity & insulation property of 
ferrocement exposed to fire, Workshop on Ferrocement and Thin Reinforced Cement 
Composites, Bangkok, Thailand. 
Fairey, Philip. (1986),  Radiant energy transfer and Radiant barrier systems in buildings, 
Florida solar energy center, pp. 132-139. 
763 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
PREDICTING IMPACTS OF FLOOD CONTROL, DRAINAGE AND IRRIGATION 
PROJECT (FCDI) ON THE HAOR ECOSYSTEM AND FISHERIES: A CASE STUDY 
ON PROPOSED GUNGIAJURI FCDI PROJECT 
 
 
Mohammed Mukteruzzaman1, Md. Shibly Sadik2 and Md. Waji Ullah3 
 
 
ABSTRACT: The Gungiajuri Integrated Water Resources Management project has been planned 
and designed for devising the lowlands flood-free and dry for year round food grain cultivation 
and provide surface water crop irrigation. The FCDI project area is located partially in Bahubal, 
Habiganj Sadar, Nabiganj and Baniachang upazilas of Habiganj District. The BWDB entrusted 
CEGIS for conducting the study on “Environmental and Social Impact Assessment’ of the project. 
This paper focuses on the predicted impacts of proposed water resources interventions on the 
ecosystem and fisheries resources. The interventions include construction of embankment, 
strengthening existing submersible embankment to full flood control, water regulatory structures, 
pump stations, river and khal re-excavation, etc. The Impact Assessment was carried out by 
conducting baseline survey, public consultations, major field investigation and using 
mathematical model outputs of the responsible modeling organization. It has been obtained from 
model data that around 74% of the project area land would be flood free, in turn increase year 
round crop lands and cropping intensity by 81% while loss of seasonal floodplain habitat and 
migratory routes would hinder fish production nearly by 50% and loss of 55% seasonal 
waterbodies would degrade the ecosystem and the ground water recharge potential as well. Crop 
based sustainable financial improvement and paradigm shift to other income generating activities 
in one hand, reduction of fishing based livelihoods by 55%, loss of biodiversity, loss of 
ecosystem services, and functions in the other hand would be the major impacts of the project. 
Despite the carbohydrate based food security as expected in project plan, the project would result 
loss of fisheries habitats, fish diversity, deterioration of water purification function, land 
fertilization function, eco-tourism services of ecosystem, and extinction of presently endangered 
species. A comprehensive Environmental Management Plan (EMP) including option for design 
reconciliation, mitigation measures, and enhancement measures has been proposed for attaining 
sustainability of the water management project conserving Haor ecosystem and fisheries.  
 
 
 
 
                                                        
1Professional, Centre for Environment and Geographic Information Services (CEGIS), Dhaka. mdza
man@cegisbd.com 
2Professional, Centre for Environment and Geographic Information Services (CEGIS), Dhaka. ssadik
@cegisbd.com 
3Deputy Executive Director (Operations), Centre for Environment and Geographic Information Servi
ces (CEGIS), Dhaka. wullah@cegisbd.com 
764 
 
1. Introduction 
 
The haor areas of Bangladesh with unique hydro-ecological characteristics are large bowl shaped 
floodplain depressions located in the north-eastern region of Bangladesh. Gungiajuri, as in other 
haors, has a history of experiencing annual floods, and occasionally, catastrophic floods. In many 
respects, such flooding oscillations are beneficial; however, in some cases, the detrimental effects 
are believed to outweigh the benefits. Some floods have had devastating impacts on both 
infrastructure and human lives. Therefore, a flood control scheme in the form of embankments 
and related water control measures, collectively known as "Flood Control and Drainage (FCD) 
project, has been developed by the Bangladesh Water Development Board (BWDB). 
   Gungiajuri haor has been providing different goods and services to its dependent people. The 
important goods and services include boro paddy, small scale medium high land aus and aman 
paddy, year round fish production, edible aquatic plants, wet season navigation, etc. Standing 
crops of this area are being damaged every year due to insufficient resistance to inflow of pre-
monsoon flood water, flashy in nature, into the haor area. As a result, the socioeconomic 
condition of the inhabitants adjacent to and dependent on the haor continued to deteriorate. 
   For resolving such long persistent problems, a comprehensive feasibility study was conducted 
during the period of 1986-87 to 1992-93. As per recommendations of the study, BWDB 
implemented the Gungiajuri FCD scheme which comprises of two sub-projects namely KR-1 and 
KR-2 on both banks of the Karangi River. But now-a-days, the ecosystem of KR-2 Sub-project is 
highly disturbed and dependent livelihoods are critically jeopardized while it is partially degraded 
in the KR-1 Sub-project. In response to the present situation and social demand, BWDB aims to 
study and implement an integrated water management project in the Gungiajuri Haor area 
including extended part in Habiganj district. Feasibility study comprises multiple components of 
which environmental and social impact assessment (ESIA) is an integral part through which 
environmental sustainability and social acceptability of the proposed project have been audited. 
This paper presents a part of the ESIA carried out by CEGIS. Objective of this paper is to address 
the impacts of the FCDI project on the Haor ecosystem and fisheries. An Environmental 
Management Plan has also been suggested in the paper. 
 
 
2. Proposed Guingiajuri Integrated Water Management Project 
 
The proposed interventions include (i) upgrading 27 km and establishing 16.6 km flood control 
embankment; (ii) establishing two pumping stations with the capacity of 32 and 34 m3/s; (iii) 
installing two rubber dams (a) on Karangi River at height of 3.4m and (b) on Bijna River at 
height of 4 m; and (iv) re-excavation of river/khal 113 km and beel/jalmohal 150 ha (CEGIS 
2011).  
The feasibility study defines the project as of full flood control embankment in view of one 
polder comprising KR1 and North area. For this, about 13,600 ha land might be protected from 
flash flood as well as monsoon flood in the project area. As such, 67% (9,972 ha) land of the total 
project area would be converted to flood-free land whereas very low land would decrease to only 
0.5% (102 ha) (BETS, 2011). The ladnuse change is depicted in Figure 1 below. 
765 
 
  
Figure 1 Flood extent in base situation (left) and FWIP situation (right) [Source:CEGIS, 2011] 
  
3. Approach and Methodology 
 
The proposed project area is located partially in Bahubal, Habiganj Sadar, Nabiganj and 
Baniachang upazilas of Habiganj district of Bangladesh. The study area is bounded by Bijna and 
Gungiajuri rivers in the north and west, Khowai River in the south and Dhaka-Sylhet road in the 
east. The gross area of the present project is 20,413 ha where KR-1, KR-2 and proposed area 
share 7,110 ha, 8,450 ha and 4,853 ha respectively and the net area is about 17,366 ha. Field data 
were collected using different tools including observational survey, vegetation survey, fish catch 
assessment, fishing effort, fish market survey, institutional survey (BWDB, UFOs, DAE, FD, 
etc.), two public consultation meetings (PCMs), 20 focus group discussions (FGDs) and several 
key informant’s interviews (KIIs). Secondary data on fisheries and forest & wildlife resources 
were collected from UFOs and FD respectively. In accordance with the WARPO guideline 
(WARPO, 2005) and following the standard methodology, impacts were predicted on the basis of 
expert judgment, observational judgment, RS/GIS analysis and consultation with stakeholders. 
 
766 
 
4. Ecosystem and Fisheries Resources of Gungiajuri Haor 
Gungiajuri Haor is spatially distributed in the depressed area of Khowai, Karangi and Bijna-
Gungiajuri River sub-project. Numerous hilly streams (Chhara), around 33 beels, three major 
rivers with numerous criss-crossed canals, and vast area of perennial water bodies are the 
noteworthy aspects of physical ecology of the area. The ecology of the Haor is very critical that 
shows seasonal variation. It receives surface water runoff from rivers and Hilly stream, and 
consequently, becomes vast water body in during monsoon and dries up in post monsoon except 
some beels and low lying area that contain water round the year. During monsoon whole area 
provides habitat for diversified hydrophytes, aquatic birds and fisheries, while during winter, 
most of the area is covered with boro rice. The species abundance and composition shows 
seasonal variation. The ecosystem also shows close relationship with physical settings, hydrology 
and social system of the region (FAP 16, 1992). Flooding oscillation and seasonal variations in 
rainfall, have been keeping vital role in sustaining fisheries resources and ecosystem of the area. 
Societal dependency on haor ecosystem and ecosystem dependency on hydrological system 
makes the ecosystem more complex and interesting. The ecological events-breeding seasons, 
migratory seasons etc, are closely related with hydrological cycle and events. The region is 
enriched with diversified flora, fauna and is also last habitat of several endangered species like 
Pallas’s Fish Eagle. 
The area is composed of diversified fresh water fish habitats including river, khal, beel, 
extensive floodplain, fish pond with culture practice of traditional to improved traditional and 
other pond & ditch. The rivers, beel connectivity/khals and hill streams (in some cases) have been 
acting as important arteries of spawning and feeding migration into the study area. The perennial 
beels (e.g. Sakua beel, Aiduba beel, Uttarsur beel, Purbakora beel, Bara Paika beel, Roail beel, 
Loriar beel, Garua beel, Hugli beel, Kura beel, etc.) area considered as the residences of different 
brood/mother fish species. The estimated fish habitat area is 14,900 ha where capture area 
contributes 98.4% and culture area shares the rest. Fish production is estimated to 5,000 tonnes of 
which bulk portion of around 4,430 m. ton (87.5%) comes from the capture fishery (Figure 2). 
Comparisons of area and corresponding productions are shown in above figure by habitats. From 
the figure it is observed that over 84% of fish catch come from floodplain habitat. 
 
Figure 2: Fish habitat and production in the project area
767 
 
 
Figure 3 Map showing Water Resources System of the project area 
768 
 
5. Impact Prediction 
The proposed full flood protection will reduce 73.3% of the existing seasonal water bodies in 
KR-1 sub-project and 82.7% of the existing seasonal water bodies in North area. This destruction 
in habitats will cause significant biodiversity loss of the region. The change in ecosystem habitat 
due to the proposed FCDI project can be presented in the following figure. 
Figure 4: Predicted changes in Ecosystem Habitat due to proposed project 
Water quality parameters like pH, nutrient load, alkalinity and other chemical parameters of haor 
water that change seasonally according to flood cycle (Muzaffar and Ahmed, 2006) and maintain 
wetland productivity and ecosystem activity will be interrupted.  Entering of allochthonous 
nutrients from upstream with usual flood water might be prevented by the proposed full flood 
protection. Hence, the wetland productivity will be significantly reduced. 
   Water purification service of wetland will malfunction after full flood protection. 
Eutrophication in water bodies will increase due to excessive agricultural practices and 
prevention of flood water intake. Malfunction of wetland services and low productivity of 
wetland resources will be observed remarkably. 
   Change in flood cycle, depth, duration, and extent as a consequence of full flood protection 
significantly affect breeding of wildlife. Amphibians, water fowl, water snakes, aquatic birds, and 
other aquatic wildlife that breed during flood seasons with flooding environment will be 
significantly affected due to full flood protection. Food sources of terrestrial wildlife like birds 
and mammals and monitor lizards that forage in wetland resources (fish, floating plants, 
zooplankton, etc) will be diminished due to full flood protection. 
   The proposed full flood protection project will brings loss of around 54% seasonal water 
bodies that means loss of migratory birds’ habitat. These water bodies provide feeding, breeding 
and resting habitat for numerous migratory birds, wading birds, waterfowl, and other wetland 
birds.  
   The estimated floodplain fish habitat area would be 6,423 ha (Base: 14,219 ha) and fish pond 
area would be 240 ha (Base: 233 ha) while the surface areas of other habitats would be remain 
769 
 
same as the base condition. Fish catch and production is estimated to 65 tonnes for riverine 
habitats, 64 tonnes for beel/haors, 1,296 tonnes for floodplain and 796 tonnes for fish pond. 
   Excavation of Rivers, canals and beels would improve productivity of fish in Rivers, canals 
and beels. On the other hand full flood protection would limit the floodplain fish habitat and 
production. Fully flood control embankments accept the eastern boundary would inhibit the 
intrusion of such riverine fish species those graze and breed in the floodplain as it is nutrient rich 
habitat. However, full flood embankments would limit the nutrient influxes from river to beel and 
vice-versa. In KR-2 area, floodplain habitat will remain same as no new intervention would be 
implemented in this sub-project 
   The estimated net loss to the fish habitat area is expected to be 11 ha as beel area would be 
reduced by 15 ha due to progressive siltation and agricultural encroachment while fish pond area 
would be increased as per general tendency by 4 ha. The net loss of fish production would be 
over 2,400 tonnes in a year and this loss would mostly come from floodplain habitat.  
   As a whole, the proposed full flood protection will involve significant loss of biodiversity and 
capture fisheries habitat through destructing their feeding, breeding and nesting habitats. On the 
other hand, the proposed project will also bring agricultural development, which is also a prime 
need of the time.  
 
6. Environmental Management Plan 
The following measures should be considered in different phases of the project design and 
implementation to achieve a true benefit from the project ensuring minimum environmental 
damage. 
 
 Reconciliation of the design. Avoid full flood protection and opt submergible 
embankment for controlling only flash flood 
 Provision of ecosystem conservation and management program with partial flood 
control concept 
 Establish at least two sanctuaries in KR-1 and North area. Rotational methods of 
sanctuary establishment might be followed. 
 Construction of fish friendly structures instead of traditional water regulatory 
structures; 
 Establishment of three (3) fish sanctuaries in over wintering habitats for conserving 
brood/mother fish stock of rare indigenous fish species;  
 Leasing water bodies  to the affected fishermen by making association under the co-
management arrangement; 
 Encourage farmers to adopt IPM approach; 
 Building awareness of local people for ecosystem conservation; 
 Restoring connectivity of beels with internal khals and major rivers; 
 Reduction of fishing stress on perennial beels by generating alternate income 
activities to core fishers; 
 Establishment of genuine fishers association by utilizing the existing associations 
under the co-management arrangement for better management of the jalmohals;  
 Promoting rice-cum-fish culture in medium low lands where deep water rice would 
be cultivated; 
 Promote beel nursery program with native and purebred fish seeds in the shallow 
770 
 
beel and khal; 
 Introduction of net-pen fish culture practice; and 
 Re-introduction of rare fish species those were abundant for improving fish 
biodiversity. 
 
7. Concluding Remarks 
Enhancement of crop production from the Gungiajuri Haor and thus improving the life and 
livelihoods of the haor dependent population is the prime objective of Integrated Water 
Management Project of Gungiajuri haor. The proposed project would bring agricultural 
development protecting the land from flood and developing irrigation facilities. On the other 
hand, the interventions proposed by the project would substantially reduce fish production and 
overall degradation of haor ecosystem though it would bring agricultural development and 
increase crop production. As such, the policy makers and scientific community has to define the 
degree of trade off between agricultural development and ecosystem damage that would be 
acceptable to all and will bring sustainable socio-economic development. However, reconciliation 
of the project avoiding full flood protection and adopting the suggested Environmental 
Management Plan will ensure attaining of design benefit of the project. 
 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
The authors are grateful to Center for Environmental and Geographical Information Services 
(CEGIS) for availing opportunity to carry out this research. Support and direction of Mr. 
Giasuddin Ahmed Choudhury, Executive Director, CEGIS are sincerely acknowledged. The 
authors also appreciate contribution and support of other team member of the ESIA of 
Guinguajuri IWM Project. Timely facilitation and guidance of Mr. Sarfaraz Wahed, Director, 
Water Resources Division, CEGIS and Mr. Mujibul Huq, Environmental Advisor of CEGIS are 
sincerely acknowledged. 
 
 
References 
 
BETS. (2011) Feasibility Study of Integrated Water Management Project of Gungiajuri Haor 
Area. BETS Consulting Services Ltd, Bangladesh Water Development Board, Ministry of 
Water Resources of Bangladesh. 
CEGIS. (2011). Final Report: Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (EIASIA) of 
Integrated Water Management Project of Gungiajuri Haor Area. Center for Environmental and 
Geographic Information Services (CEGIS), Bangladesh Water Development Board, Ministry 
of Water Resources of Bangladesh. 
FAP 16, 1992 Environmental Impact Assessment Case study Surma-Kushiyara Project, Flood 
Action Plan, Ministry of Water Resources of Bangladesh. 
Muzaffar S. B., Ahmed F. A., 2006 The Effects of the Flood Cycle on the Diversity and 
Composition of the Phytoplankton Community of a Seasonally Flooded Ramsar Wetland in 
Bangladesh, Wetlands Ecology and Management, Vol 15(2), 81-93, DOI: 10.1007/s11273-
006-9014-6. 
771 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
MEASUREMENT OF WASTEWATER BIODEGRADABILITY  
USING HEADSPACE GAS RESPIROMETER 
 
 
M.S. Rahman1, M.A. Islam2, M.S.A. Amin3 and T. Ahammad4 
 
 
ABSTRACT: The purpose of the research work is to authenticate an alternative measuring 
technique of biodegradation criteria of wastewater in compare to the conventional biochemical 
oxygen demand (BOD) method. The biodegradability of three different types of wastewater 
samples (municipal, industrial, medical) were measured in terms of headspace oxygen uptake rate 
(HSOUR) using laboratory built volumetric respirometer. The experimental respirograms show a 
clear idea about the wastewater characteristics, degradability of special pollutants as well as 
parameters required for mathematical modeling to optimize the design and operation of an 
effluent treatment plant (ETP). 
 
Keywords: BOD5, Oxygen Uptake Rate (OUR), Wastewater, Biodegradability, Volumetric 
respirometer, Headspace gas, Temperature control unit. 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Organic material in wastewater is removed in order to reduce oxygen consuming substances in 
the recipient and it is performed by bacteria at wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs) (VATTEN 
et al., 2007). Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD5) is a significant environmental index used to 
measure the quality of water and treatment results in WTPs. Conventionally BOD is measured 
with universal ‘Iodometric Titration’ method (Standard Methods, 2005). However the method 
involves some inconveniences which have prompted the search for alternate, simpler and more 
rapid procedures. Among the inconveniences, some are: (1) requirement of a high concentration 
of active acclimated seed bacteria (2) necessity of pretreatment when dealing with toxic wastes 
and/or nitrifying organisms (3) requirement of sample dilution and long period of time to obtain 
test results (4) does not provide any information about biodegradation (Metcalf and Eddy, 2005). 
All such problems can be overcome by measuring Headspace Oxygen Uptake (HSOU) by 
volumetric respiratory method. Micro-organisms take oxygen during respiration and direct 
                                                        
1Assistant Professor, Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, SUST, Sylhet, Bangladesh.  
msr.ceesust@gmail.com  
2Professor, Department of Chemical Engineering and Polymer Science, SUST, Sylhet, Bangladesh.  
mislam@sust.edu 
3Lecturer, Department of Chemical Engineering and Polymer Science, SUST, Sylhet, Bangladesh. 
saiket_cep@yahoo.com 
4Student (B.Sc Engg. Final year), Department of Chemical engineering and polymer Science, SUST, 
Sylhet, Bangladesh, ove.cep@gmail.com 
772 
 
measurement of these oxygen use based on pressure changes in a sealed vessel containing air and 
a stirred wastewater sample. However to achieve more sophisticated result, respirometer 
equipped with different types of dissolved oxygen (DO) sensors can be used (Katri, 2009). In this 
work there use a volumetric respirometer with thermal controller. Headspace Oxygen uptake 
(HSOU) measurements can provide much information concerning treatment plant performance, 
wastewater characteristics, degradability of special concentrated streams, Rate of Oxygen uptake, 
biokinetic characteristics  as well as parameters needed for mathematical models, in order to 
predict possible optimizations of a treatment plant. In addition it is useful for daily operation 
control (Peter A. Vanrolleghem et al., 2007). 
 
 
2. Materials and Methods 
 
2.1 Respiration apparatus 
 
For the measurement of biodegradation and respiration pattern the laboratory developed 
respirometer is used which is given below in a schematic diagram (fig. 1). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In this locally fabricated low cost multi-chamber thermal control respirometer there are five 
sample wastewater chambers and a blank control chamber in a common thermal control unit. 
Each chamber consists of a volumetric 500 ml conical flask, a potassium hydroxide chamber, a 
stir mechanism unit, a level controller, a volumetric manometer unit (shown in fig.1). Before 
experiment it is confirmed that all points of the apparatus is sealed. 
773 
 
2.2. Wastewater samples  
 
The research was conducted for three different type of wastewater sample among them the first 
one was municipal waste water collected from Subid bazaar area, Sylhet second one was medical 
waste water collected from Medical road, Sylhet and the third one was industrial waste water 
(food industry) also from Sylhet. After collection, samples were kept for a time for settle down 
the sludge and suspended particles and also separated the floating particles. Then after smooth 
striation the liquid samples ware made uniform. 5ml, 15ml, 30ml, 50ml, 100ml samples were 
collected from mother sample in five conical flasks chamber and diluted those into 300 ml with 
corresponding oxygen saturated distil water. The other bank chamber was filled with only 300 ml 
oxygen saturated distilled water. Temperature is kept at 320C. The observation ran for five days. 
 
2.2.1. The biodegradation mechanism and overall mass transfer system  
The measurement of oxygen uptake gives information about biodegradation and mass transfer in 
an air sealed system.  
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Figure 2 Biodegradation of waste component during respiration & mass transfer mechanism 
This overall transfer system can be described in a microscopic level image which is given below 
in fig. 2 .The Oxygen is in both liquid and gaseous phase. After certain time there reach a 
dynamic equilibrium between this two phases oxygen concentration. If Heterotrophic biomass 
774 
 
presents in wastewater takes oxygen from liquid phase then to maintain equilibrium the oxygen 
molecules comes to the liquid phase. Organisms take that oxygen and food (waste component) 
for their survival and as a result the component degrades. 
 
 
3. Result and Discussion   
 
Three samples of wastewater shows different degradation patterns (fig. 3). From their fingerprint 
of COU vs. Time; Graph-1 shows very high amount of oxygen uptake (50 ml) within a short time 
(up to 2000 minutes).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3 Graphical representation of Cumulative Oxygen Uptake with Time for different samples 
 
After that the uptake is little bit slower (60 ml) for a period (up to 6000 minutes) and then it 
reaches an equilibrium state. For Graph 2 and Graph 3 there are gradual increases of oxygen 
uptake with time during 5 days period and the COU fingerprint is almost straight line. From the 
fingerprint of HSOUR (ml/L/min) with time (fig. 4) there are 3 types of degradable components 
in wastewater. 
775 
 
 Directly biodegradable – This types of component shows very rapid degradation and 
there is a higher pick of OU and HSOUR. 
 Easily biodegradable – This types of component shows a degradation period that is not 
so fast or slow. 
 Slowly biodegradable – these types shows a very slow OU and HSOUR picks in the 
fingerprint.  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4. Modeling concept for Bio-degradation criterion  
 
Modeling is important for the design and control of the respiration biodegradation process. In the 
traditional modeling approach respiration is associated with growth and decay of micro-
organisms.  
   In the death-regeneration approach, adopted in the IAWQ Activated Sludge Model No.1, 
respiration is associated only with aerobic growth of heterotrophic and nitrifying biomass. Fig. 5 
schematically shows the main processes for heterotrophic growth and biodegradation for the two 
approaches. 
   Both approaches describe growth of biomass (XH) as a process where oxygen is consumed. 
However, the traditional approach considers biomass decay as additional oxygen consuming 
process in which decaying biomass is oxidized while inert matter (XP) is formed. The model 
implies that, when the activated sludge has run out of readily biodegradable substrate (SS) and 
slowly biodegradable matter (XS) from the wastewater, the remaining oxygen consumption is 
associated with biomass decay only. According to the death-regeneration approach decaying 
biomass is split into two fractions: inert matter and slowly biodegradable matter. The latter is 
subsequently hydrolyzed into readily biodegradable substrate.  
 
776 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   This process does not involve any consumption of oxygen (or another electron acceptor). The 
death-regeneration model implies that, even when all the substrate originating from the 
wastewater is oxidized, there remains an oxygen consumption associated with the growth on 
substrate released from decay and hydrolysis. The amount of new biomass formed from released 
substrate is always less than the amount of biomass lost.  
   Both models imply that if biomass is left on its own without input of biodegradable matter 
from wastewater the respiration rate will gradually decrease until all the biomass has decayed. 
The respiration rate during this process is called the endogenous respiration rate. The endogenous 
respiration rate of activated sludge can be defined in operational terms as the oxygen 
consumption rate in the absence of substrate from external sources. According to this definition 
the endogenous respiration not only includes decay of bacteria (and concomitant growth in case 
of death-regeneration) but also oxygen consumption by protozoa. Note that in the microbiological 
literature the maintenance concept is also used as another description of microbial behavior. In 
this concept external substrate is oxidized to maintain the biomass in its current state. No new 
biomass is produced, distinguishing maintenance from growth, and substrate is only oxidized for 
energy generation. A consensus is growing that from a modeling and measuring point of view 
both maintenance and endogenous concepts are able to represent this specific process behavior. 
The endogenous respiration rate is practically independent of the substrate concentration and, as 
such, indicative for the concentration of active biomass.  (Peter A. Vanrolleghem). 
 
4.1. Further development of conceptual model  
 
Fig. 6 shows the basic modeling of oxygen transfer rate. In the bio-degradation process the rate 
limiting factor of all kinds of chemical reaction is the diffusion. So an oxygen molecule first 
comes to the liquid phase through a gas- liquid interface and then this molecule is taken by 
heterogeneous biomass for the degradation of a component present in wastewater. 
 
 
 
777 
 
5. Conclusion 
 
The respirometric test was found to be suitable to determine cumulative oxygen uptake (COU) 
and headspace oxygen uptake rate (HSOUR) for the purpose of biodegradation study of 
wastewater. The work revealed that the respirometric test has many advantages over the classical 
BOD determination method including reduced sample preparation time, use of non-diluted 
samples, easy and continuous monitoring, faster measuring time and less testing cost. There is a 
huge opportunity to synchronize this method with our local industry.  Further investigation can 
strengthen the procedure to imply in the design and operation of biological effluent treatment 
plant. 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
This study has been supported by the research funds of Shahjalal University of Science and 
Technology and Centre for Environmental Process Engineering, CEP, Sylhet, Bangladesh. M.S. 
Rahman acknowledges NSICT fellowship awarded by Ministry of Information, Science and 
Technology, Bangladesh.  
 
References 
 
Jerry Y. C. Huang and Meng-Dawn Cheng,  (1984),  Measurement  and New Applications of     
   Oxygen Uptake Rates in  Activated Sludge Processes, Journal of Water Pollution  Control  
   Federation, Vol. 56, No. 3, Part I, pp. 259-265. 
778 
 
Dr. Md. A. Islam and M.S. Rahman, Application of a  simple  Manometric Respirometer for  
   measuring the Oxygen Uptake Rate of Wastewater, SUST, Sylhet, Bangladesh, CERIE 2010. 
Peter A. Vanrolleghem, Principles of Respirometry in Activated Sludge  Wastewater Treatment            
   Department of applied Mathematics, Biometrics and Process control. Coupure Links 653, B-    
   9000 Gent, Belgium. 
Marinette HagMan and Jes la Cour Jansen(2007)Water and environmental engineering / Dep. of    
   Chemical engineering, lund university VATTEN 63:131–138. Lund 2007.  
Katri Roppola (2009), Environmental applications of manometric respirometric methods. Faculty         
   of Science, Department of Chemistry, University of OULU.  
Marinette  Hagman  and  Jes la  Cour Jansen, (2007), Oxygen uptake rate measurements for   
   application at wastewater treatment plants, VATTEN 63:131–138. Lund.  
Metcalf and Eddy, (2005), Wastewater Engineering, Tata McGraw-Hill Edition.  
Roppola K, Kuokkanen T, Nurmesniemi H, Rämö J, Pöykiö R, Prokkola H (2006), Comparison    
   study of  manometric  respirometric  test and  common  chemical  methods  in  the     
   determination of BOD7 in a pulp  and paper mill's wastewaters. Journal of Automated   
   Methods and Management in Chemistry, 2006, Article ID 90384: 1-5.  
American Water Works  Association,  Standard  Methods for the Examination of  Water and  
   Wastewater, Iodometric Methods, (2005), Water Environment Federation.  
 
 
779 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
APPLICATION OF MULTIFARIOUS COMPOUNDS IN SHRIMP FIRMS AND ITS 
IMPACT ON THE ENVIRONMENT  
 
 
Md. Monzur Hossain1, Khondoker Mahbub Hassan2, Shuvo Ramo Saha3,  Quazi Hamidul Bari4 
 
 
ABSTRACT: The study aims at compiling of the substances used for different purposes in 
shrimp farming and the possible environmental effects of these products were documented. A 
comprehensive field survey has been conducted in 30 major shrimp producing farms in the south-
west coastal region of Bangladesh. The most common products were related to soil and water 
treating disinfectants, antibiotics, pesticides, fertilizers and feed additives. In the study area, 96% 
of shrimp farms were found applying zeolite or liming compounds for soil and water treatment, 
100% using organic or inorganic fertilizers, 73% utilizing pesticides and disinfectants, 82% using 
antibiotics. Nevertheless, over 14 categories of feed additives were found using widely in all the 
shrimp firms. Feed additives contained more than 10 different chemicals and biological 
substances like minerals, vitamin, protein, ash, fiber, fat, calcium, phosphorus, limestone etc. The 
application rates of fish additives were observed 2~5% of fish weights using 2 times per day. 
Inappropriate and excess use of chemicals and accumulation of surplus feed in the pond makes 
the soil acidic and unsuitable for any further use either agriculture or other fish culture, at least in 
the short runs. Moreover, some chemical compounds with high affinity to sediments leave 
persistent and toxic residues in shrimp farms which likely to have a negative impact on the 
environment. Thus, it is imperative to consider an environment friendly method addressing the 
safe application of chemicals and biological compounds in shrimp farming for its sustainability.  
 
Keywords: Chemical and biological compounds, environmental impacts, shrimp 
culture, sustainability.  
 
1. Introduction 
 
An Export-orientated shrimp aquaculture has been introduced since mid 1980s along the coastal 
region of Bangladesh. Over the last few decades, due to lucrative foreign currency, the trend of 
land uses in coastal region has been expanded about 10 times by converting from agriculture to 
shrimp culture (Rahaman M., 2010). Shrimp, the white gold bar of Bangladesh is the second 
highest foreign exchange earner which accounts for 5.2% of the total export following the 
                                                
1 M. Sc Engineering Scholar (Environmental Engineering), Department of Civil Engineering, KUET, 
Khulna, Bangladesh, ripon3032000@yahoo.com 
2 Associate Professor, Department of Civil Engineering, KUET, Khulna, Bangladesh, 
khmhassan@yahoo.com 
3 M. Sc Engineering Scholar (Environmental Engineering), Department of Civil Engineering, KUET, 
Khulna, Bangladesh, shuvo_ce04@yahoo.com 
4 Professor, Department of Civil Engineering, KUET, Khulna, Bangladesh, qhbari@ce.kuet.ac.bd 
780 
 
readymade garments (RMG) sector. At present, Bangladesh is the 8th largest shrimp producer of 
the world and produces 2.5% of the global shrimp output (DoF, 2006; BCAS, 2001). In 2005-06, 
south-west region produced 78.9% of the Bangladesh’s total shrimp production (DoF, 2006). 
There is no doubt that the coastal aquaculture is a very important economic factor for the country. 
In the shadow of the value of the shrimp farming sector, much attention has been paid to several 
negative environmental and socio-economic impacts of the industry. Many environmentalists 
have concentrated on this unrestrained farming nature because of its detrimental effects to 
susceptibility of both shrimp and agriculture (Subasinghe et al., 2000; Graslund and Bengtsson, 
2001). The main concerns have been the destruction of mangroves and other wetlands for the 
construction of shrimp farms (Hopkins et al., 1995), salinisation of the soil (Flaherty et al., 2000), 
biological pollution of native shrimp stocks (Hopkins et al., 1995; Kautsky et al., 2000; Naylor et 
al., 2000), depletion of wild fish populations through large inputs of fish meal and fish oil in 
commercial shrimp feed (Naylor et al., 2000), eutrophication (Hopkins et al., 1995; Boyd and 
Clay, 1998; Kautsky et al., 2000); and the dispersion of chemicals in the environment (Hopkins et 
al., 1995; Kautsky et al.,2000). Use of antimicrobials, chemicals, fertilizers and pesticides in 
aquaculture has threatened the biodiversity of coastal environment. Antibiotics and disinfectants 
chemicals like copper compounds, iodophorms, formalin, malachite green etc can create health 
hazards for the persons handling them as well as can kill non-targeted organisms if discharged 
into the main water body through effluents (Vijayakumaran 1997). The aggressive promotion of 
drugs and chemicals by companies has partially led to an increased use of such products by 
farmers (Tonguthai, 2000). 
   Graslund & Bengtsson (2001) reported that the quality and the quantity of the use of chemicals 
used in the south-east Asian aquaculture sector were scarce. Most of the countries have no perfect 
data on the amounts of chemicals, antibiotics, pesticides used in aquaculture inside their territory. 
However, chemical manufacturer does not release this information even though they do not know 
the ultimate use of their products. In Bangladesh there has no document/data about the use of 
drugs, chemicals and antibiotics in shrimp aquaculture. There has been a tendency that individual 
farmers and hatchery technicians select their own treatment regimes and do their own 
experiment. Some of these issues have given the shrimp farming industry a negative image in 
countries that import shrimps, and among environmentalists within the producing countries. 
There is an increasing interest in an environmentally friendly shrimp culture within the shrimp 
farming industry, and efforts to reach a sustainable production are being made. 
   The purpose of this study is to document the current status on the use of antibiotics, chemicals, 
biological and other products in shrimp aquaculture in Bangladesh; and secondly, taking into 
consideration of their impact on the environment. 
 
2. Methodology 
 
A questionnaire survey has been carried out recently in 30 shrimp producing farms in the south-
west coastal district such as Khulna, Satkhira and Bagerhat of Bangladesh (figure 1). Farms were 
selected as randomly as possible within each area. The survey was accomplished based on 
interview method, asking questions to owner of farms or responsible manager of the farms. The 
questions were open-ended and followed up when necessary.  The survey has covered with 
general information of farms; on the method of pond management practice; at various stages, the 
use of multifarious materials or compounds into their pond with a focus of chemicals and 
biological products. The chemicals and biological products documented in the survey were 
781 
 
arranged into the following major groups: fertilizers, pesticides and disinfectants, antibiotics, 
microorganisms, vitamins, soil and water treatment compounds, and feed additives. 
 
 
 
                                                    Figure 1 Location of study area 
 
After compilation of multifarious compounds, an attempt was taken to assess their impacts on the 
environment based on available scientific technical reports.   
 
3. Results and discussion 
 
3.1 Proportion Use of Chemicals and Biological Products  
 
More than 43 different substances or types of products were identified in the present study (Table 
1, 2 & 3). Farmers have been using these products in different purpose and phases in a shrimp 
production cycle. The most commonly used groups of products were soil and water treatment 
compounds, fertilizers, pesticides and disinfectants, antibiotics, feed additives and vitamins 
(vitamins always includes in commercial feed). The percentages of farmers using these different 
products are shown in Fig. 2. 
 
3.2 Soil and water treatment compounds 
 
The most commonly used substances were liming compounds, which were used by all without 
4% of the farmers (figure 2). A majority of these farmers used them to adjust pH, but at least one 
third additionally used them as disinfectants to kill pathogens or plankton. Shrimp farms are often 
located in acid sulfate soil areas, e.g. former mangrove areas, where liming may be of particular 
importance (Gesamp, 1997). Zeolite products, i.e. hydrated alkali–aluminum silicates, were also 
used by a majority (70%) of the farmers. Most of the farmers used Zeolite during pond 
782 
 
preparation to purifying water, improved water quality, increase dissolved oxygen, helps in the 
production of algae, reduces shrimp death rate and removes offensive odor from water, whereas 
only a few used them to remove ammonia. Removal of ammonia is previously known as one of 
the main purposes of Zeolite use in shrimp ponds, a practice that has been questioned (Boyd, 
1995). In this study, there are three types of liming compounds has documented in (table 1) with 
molecular formula and application rate during pond preparation. 
 
 
 
Figure 2 Proportion of farms in study area those using one or several chemical/biological 
products  
 
Table 1: List of liming and fertilizer products used in shrimp farms 
 
Use Group Product Molecular formula Dosage 
(kg/ha) 
Soil and 
Water 
Treatment 
Liming 
compounds 
Calcium Carbonate 
Dolomite  
Zeolite 
CaCO3 
CaMg(CO3)2 
Na2Al2Si3O10·2H2O 
75-100    
30-35 
70-80 
783 
 
Fertilizers Inorganic 
fertilizers 
 
 
 
Organic fertilizers 
Mixed fertilizer 
Urea 
Triple superphosphate 
(TSP) 
Oil cake 
Di-ammonium Phosphate 
Cow dung 
Compost 
NH2-CO-NH2 
Ca(H2PO4)2 
 
- 
(NH4)2HPO4 
- 
- 
50-100 
20-50  
 
4-4.5 
25-50  
1000-1200 
750-1000      
 
3.3 Fertilizers 
 
Fertilizers are added to ponds to increase nutrient concentrations, stimulate phytoplankton growth 
and to increase food supply to the cultured shrimp (Boyd and Tucker, 1998). 100% of farmers 
used organic/inorganic fertilizer in the pond management (figure 2). In this survey, the most 
common fertilizing products were NPK-fertilizer (inorganic group) and cow dung, chicken 
manure/ poultry litter in organic group (table1). At least 11 farmers out of 30 used both inorganic 
and organic fertilizers. Apparently, even though most of the farmers used pellet feed in the farm 
management, many farmers additionally chose to use fertilizers to provide natural feed as a 
complement. 
 
3.4 Pesticides and disinfectants 
 
During grow-out operation, disease is an important problem in shrimp farms of Bangladesh. 
During this operation period, the most farmers (73%) used at least one kind of pesticide or 
disinfectant to get protection from disease outbreak in the shrimp pond management (figure.2). 
As pretreatment the chlorine compound was used by 80% of the farmers and the other 
infrequently used products were formalin group, copper compounds and potassium permanganate 
(table-2). These compounds were often used for several purposes, for example, to kill algae, 
unwanted bacteria, fungi and protozoa and also to clear water.  As mentioned in table, liming 
compounds were also frequently used with the purpose of disinfection and Tea seed was the most 
commonly used organic pesticide. 
 
Table 2: Different chemicals, antibiotics and drug used in shrimp farms 
 
Disinfectant/Antibiotics/Chemical Substance Molecular Formula Dosage 
Lime 
Dolomite 
Sodium Hypochlorite 
Tea seed cake 
 
CaCO3 
CaMg(CO3)2 
NaClO 
- 
80-100kg/ha 
30-35  kg/ha 
5-10    ppm 
4-4.5   kg/ha 
Disinfectant/Antibiotics/Chemical Substance Molecular Formula Dosage 
Formaldehyde 
Malachite green 
Copper sulphate 
Methylene blue 
Potassium Permanganate 
Mahua oil and tea-seed cake 
CH2O 
C6H5C(C6H4N(CH3)2)2]Cl 
CuSO4 
C16H18N3SCl 
KMnO4 
- 
15-25  ppm 
0.75-3 ppm 
2-3      ppm 
8-10    ppm 
2.5-5   ppm 
2-10    kg/ha 
784 
 
Malathion 
Ethylenediamine  tetra  acidic acid 
C10H19O6PS2 
C10H16N2O8 
0.5-2   ppm 
5-10    ppm 
Antibiotics Molecular Formula Dosage 
Oxytetracyline 
Erythromycin 
 
Furazolidone 
Sulphamethaxazole (Antibacterials) 
C22H24N2O9 
C37H67NO13 
 
C8H7N3O5 
C10H11N3O3S 
8-10    ppm  
2-3      gm/kg 
feed 
10-15  ppm 
0.5-2   ppm 
 
3.5 Antibiotics & Antibacterial 
 
Antibiotics were used to prevent and to treat Vibrio infections, but also in the belief that they 
could prevent and treat viral infections such as white spot disease (Holmstrom et al., 2003). The 
antibiotics were generally distributed to the shrimps mixed with the feed. According survey 
outline there is around (82%) of farms used one or several types of antibiotics (figure.1). In case 
of both pre and post treatment, they use antibiotics like oxytetracycline, erythromycin, 
furazolidone, and antibacterial like sulphamethaoxazole with chemicals be fond of malachite 
green, copper sulphate, formalin, to control common shrimp diseases (table 2). 
 
3.6 Vitamin and feed additives 
 
A majority of the interviewed farmers (97%) used vitamins (figure.2) to mix with the shrimp feed 
to increase the nutrient content for enhance growth, and prevent disease outbreaks. In this study, 
we documented a total of 14 commercial products of different fish feed company with various 
ingredients shown in table 3. 
 
Table 3: List of Feed additives used in shrimp farms 
 
Use Compositions 
Commercially manufactured Feed (Total found 14 
products) 
Humidity  
Protein  
Fat  
Calcium  
Phosphorus  
Vitamin  
Mineral  
Soybean meal  
Fish meal  
Seed meal  
Use Compositions 
Commercially manufactured Feed  Di-calcium phosphate  
Lime stone  
Ash Fibber 
Other feed additives Rice bran  
Oil cake  
Snail meat  
785 
 
Corn cake  
Cooked rice  
Poultry litter 
 
3.7 Impact on Environment 
 
The absence of exact quantitative information, it is very difficult to assess the impact of shrimp 
farming on the environment. However, with the available information on the types of chemicals 
that are used, the main aspects regarding their environmental fate can discuss.  There are three 
main groups of substances used in shrimp farming that can affect the environment in multiple 
ways, i.e. toxic chemicals, disinfectant, antibiotics and nutrients.  
 
3.7.1 The adverse effects of chemical on living organisms (Eco-toxicology)  
The impact of a pollutant can be very different in a tropical environment due to the different 
temperature and light conditions, variations in rainfall and biomass content (Castillo. et al., 
1997). Differences in toxicity as a result of temperature change could be due to differences in the 
respiratory rate, chemical absorption, and excretion and detoxification of chemicals.  
   A major concern regarding pollution from shrimp farms is the possible contamination of marine 
and brackish water ecosystems. Hutchinson et al. (1998) compared the toxicity of chemicals to 
freshwater versus saltwater organisms. They concluded that the saltwater fish being more 
sensitive than freshwater fish to certain chemicals could be that they are not only exposed to 
contaminants in the water by way of the gills and skin. 
 
3.7.2 Effect of Antibiotics 
In this study we identified antibiotic compound such as; Oxytetracyline, Erythromycin, 
Furazolidone, and antibacterials compound Sulphamethaxazole.The primary effect of these 
antibiotics in the bottom sediments may change the ecological structure of benthic microbial 
communities which in turn can lead to anaerobic conditions. The disadvantage of anaerobic 
condition is producing acute toxic by-product (sulfides and ammonia) than aerobic (carbon 
dioxide and nitrates) and the degradation rate also less. Accordingly, antibacterial residues in the 
sediment can negatively affect the water quality of the shrimp ponds (Gesamp, 1997). De-
nitrification process is taking place due to the uneaten product or non-consumed substances by 
the shrimp. This biological conversion (nitrate to nitrogen) is disturbed by some chemicals 
residues and thereby decreases the water quality (Chien et al., 1999). Jacobsen and Berglind, 
(1988) showed that deposition of feed saturate with furazolidone and sulfadiazine/tri-metoprim 
increased sulfide ion activity in the fish farm bottom. When soils are acidic, hydrogen ions and 
sulfide ions can form complexes of bi-sulfide ions and hydrogen sulfide.  
 
3.7.3 Effect of Disinfectant 
The chlorinated compounds i.e.; Sodium Hypochlorite (NaOCL) were identified in this study. 
When these compounds added to natural waters can react with different organic (humic) 
substances and result in significant concentrations of halogenated hydrocarbons (Abia et .al., 
1998). Several of the halogenated hydrocarbons that are found in chlorinated drinking water are 
well-known carcinogens (Boyd, 1996).  
 
 
 
786 
 
3.7.4 Effect of Persistence Residues 
The pond environmental conditions are strongly depending on the persistence of residues. Major 
factors such as: temperature, pH, dissolved oxygen level, light intensity and the presence of 
micro-organisms are influencing the degradation of organic matter. Different substances respond 
in different ways to specific environmental conditions. Residues in sediment tend to remain for 
longer periods than residues in water, especially if there are anaerobic conditions and a lower 
possibility of photo degradation (Gesamp, 1997). On the other hand, some substances degrade 
more rapidly under anaerobic than aerobic conditions (Chien et al., 1999). Many aquaculture 
chemicals persist for very short time periods. For example, formalin has a half-life in water of 36 
hrs (Gesamp, 1997) and the antibacterial furazolidone has a half-life of 18 hrs in marine sediment 
at 40C (Samuelsen et al., 1991). Copper applied to ponds as copper sulfate will, being an element, 
remain in the environment. The cupric ion easily adsorbs to suspended particles, or forms organic 
complexes with dissolved organic matter, the form decided by many factors including pH (Shi et 
al., 1998). Several antibiotics (oxytetracycline, oxolinic acid and flumequine) have been found in 
sediments 6 months after treatment (Weston, 1996).  
 
3.7.5 Effect of Nutrients 
The Nutrient source into shrimp ponds by adding fertilizer and feed can result in the 
eutrophication of waters receiving the shrimp pond effluents (Sansanayuth et al., 1996). Coastal 
shrimp farms are often located in areas where ecosystems that are particularly sensitive to 
eutrophication (Gesamp, 1997). In Thai intensive shrimp farm, Feed has been shown to be the 
major source of Nutrient whereas fertilizer addition only accounts for a small portion of the 
nutrients (Robertson and Phillips, 1995). Elevated levels of dissolved organic nitrogen, dissolved 
organic phosphorous, total dissolved nitrogen, total suspended solids and chlorophyll a were 
observed in a creek receiving shrimp farm discharge (Wolanski et al., 2000). Eutrophication is 
often mentioned as an important negative impact of shrimp farming on the environment (Naylor 
et al., 2000).  
 
3.7.6 Residues into shrimps  
In 1991, the Japanese Health Authority found unacceptable levels of in farm raised shrimps 
imported from Thailand. The oxytetracycline compounds were found in this study. Another 
researchers, (Coloso and Borlongan, 1999) present that organotin pesticides are persistent enough 
to be present in fish 6-12 months after application, at levels that could have a negative effect on 
the humans consuming the fish. 
 
3.7.7 Increase toxicity and removal of non-target species  
Pesticides and other products used in shrimp farming for their toxic properties can pose a risk to 
wild flora and fauna, but also to the health of the shrimp (Baticados et al., 1986). The discharge 
of shrimp pond water treated with tea seed has been associated with mass fish kills in adjacent 
mangrove areas (Primavera, 1993). Organophosphates (phosphorous-based organic pesticides) 
that are used to threat or kill the non-target crustaceans (Gesamp, 1997), thus posing a threat to 
the environment.  
 
4. Conclusion  
 
In this study, we documented multifarious products that are commonly used in the shrimp farms 
of south-west region of Bangladesh. Some of these products have detrimental effects on the 
787 
 
environment such as; application of fertilizer and different feed are responsible for eutrophication 
in water bodies, antibiotics and different persistent chemicals are mixed with humic materials that 
produce complex toxic compounds, disinfectant chemicals spread in the environment as a result 
of their use in aquaculture can be acutely toxic, mutagenic or have other negative sub-lethal 
effects on the wild flora and fauna.  
   But it is necessary to collect more information about the types of chemicals and the quantities 
used in order to make accurate environmental risk assessments of chemical usage in shrimp 
farming. Without this, it is impossible to draw any conclusions on impact on the environment. 
Another field that needs to be investigated further is the environmental fate and biological effects 
of the substances, more specifically under the conditions prevalent in marine aquaculture ponds 
and in a tropical environment. 
       
References 
 
Rahaman M. (2010).Industrial shrimp farming in south-west coast of Bangladesh.Proc. A feature 
in the financial express Dhaka (VOL 18 NO -358 REGD NO DA 1589), Saturday August 7, 
2010); http:// www.thefinancialexpress- bd.com/more.php?news_id=108246 (Accessed on 15 
Aug, 2011). 
Subasinghe R.P., Barg U., Tacon A. (2000). Chemicals in Asian aquaculture: need, usage, issues 
and challenges. Proc. Use of Chemicals in Aquaculture in Asia, pp. 1-5. 
DoF, (2006).Shrimp Sub-sector Strategy, Proc. Department of Fisheries, Ministry of Fisheries 
and Livestock, Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh, p.1-13 
BCAS, (2001).The Cost and Benefit of Bagda Shrimp Farming in Bangladesh: An Economic, 
Financial and Livelihood Assessment, Proc. Prepared as part of the Fourth Fisheries Project, 
Dhaka, p.143. 
Hopkins JS, Sandifer PA., Browdy CL.,(1995).A review of water management regimes which 
abate the environmental impacts of shrimp farming. Editors: Browdy. CL Hopkins JS. The 
special session on shrimp farming,Aquaculture.World Aquaculture Society, Baton Rouge, 
Louisiana, USA. 
Kautsky N., R¨onnb¨ack P., Tedengren M., Troell M., (2000). Ecosystem perspectives on 
management of disease in shrimp pond farming. Proc. Aquaculture; 191:145-161. 
Naylor RL, Goldburg RJ, Primavera JH, Kautsky N, Beveridge MCM, Clay J, Folke C, 
Lubchenco J, Mooney H, Troell M., (2000). Effect of aquaculture on world fisheries supplies. 
Proc. Nature; 405:1017-1024. 
Boyd CE, and Clay JW, (1998). Shrimp aquaculture and the environment. Proc. Sci. Am 1998; 
278:42-49. 
Gesamp (1997). Towards safe and effective use of chemicals in coastal aquaculture. Proc. Joint 
Group of Experts on the Scientific Aspects of Marine Environmental Protection, Reports and 
Studies, no. 65. FAO, Rome, 40 pp. 
Boyd, C.E., (1995). Chemistry and efficacy of amendments used to treat water and soil quality 
imbalance in shrimp ponds. Editors: Browdy. CL, Hopkins JS. The special session on shrimp 
farming, Aquaculture.. World Aquaculture Society, Baton Rouge, LA, USA. 
Holmstrom, K., Graslund, S., Wahlstrom, A., Poungshompoo, S., Bengtsson, B.E., Kautsky, N., 
(2003).  Antibiotic use in shrimp farming and implications for environmental impacts and 
human health. Proc. International Journal of Food Science and Technology. 
Boyd, C.E., Tucker, C.S., (1998). Pond Aquaculture Water Quality Management. Kluwer, 
Norwell, M.A. 
788 
 
Tonguthai, K., (2000). The use of chemicals in aquaculture in Thailand. Proc. of the Meeting on 
the Use of Chemicals in Aquaculture in Asia, Tighauan, lloilo, Philippines, 20–22 May, pp. 
207–220. 
Vijayakumaran M., (1997). Environmental Implications of Disease Treatments in Aquaculture, 
Proc. of the International Bioethics Workshop in Madras; India. 
Castillo LE, de la Cruz E, Ruepert C., (1997). Ecotoxicology and pesticides in tropical aquatic 
ecosystems of Central America. Proc. Environ Toxicol Chem; 16:41-51. 
Hutchinson TH, Scholz N, Guhl W. (1998). Analysis of the ECETOC Aquatic Toxicity (EAT) 
database IV-comparative toxicity of chemical substances to freshwater vs saltwater organisms. 
Proc. Chemosphere; 36:143-153. 
Chien YH, Lai HT, Liu SM. (1999). Modeling the effects of sodium chloride on degradation of 
chloramphenicol in aquaculture pond sediment. Proc. Sci. Total Environ; 239:81-87. 
Jacobsen P, Berglind L. (1988). Persistence of oxytetracycline in sediments from fish farms. 
Proc.  Aquaculture; 70:365-370 
Abia L, Armesto XL, Canle L, Garcıa MV, Santaballa JA. (1998). Oxidation of aliphatic amines 
by aqueous chlorine. Proc. Tetrahedron; 54:521-530. 
Boyd CE. (1996). Chlorination and water quality in aquaculture ponds. Proc. World Aquaculture; 
27:41-45. 
Samuelsen OB, Solheim E, Lunestad B. (1991). Fate and microbiological effects of furazolidone 
in marine aquaculture sediment. Proc. Sci Total Environ; 108:275-283. 
Shi B, Allen HE, Grassi MT, Ma H. (1998). Modeling copper partitioning in surface waters. 
Proc. Water Resource; 32:3756-3764. 
Weston DP. (1996). Environmental considerations in the use of antibacterial drugs in 
aquaculture. editor: Baird DJ,. Aquaculture and water resource management. Oxford, 
UK:Blackwell Science, , 219 pp. 
Primavera JH. (1993). A critical review of shrimp pond culture in the Philippines. Proc. Rev Fish 
Sci ; 1:151-201. 
Wolanski E, Spagnol S, Thomas S, Moore K, Alongi DM, Trott L, Davidson A., (2000). 
Modeling and visualizing the fate of shrimp pond effluent in a mangrove-fringed tidal creek. 
Proc. Estuarine Coastal Shelf Sci ;50:85-97. 
Baticados MCL, Coloso RM, Duremdez C., (1986).  Studies on the chronic soft-shell syndrome 
in the tiger prawn, Penaeus monodon Fabricius from brackish water ponds. Proc. Aquaculture 
;56:271-285. 
Robertson AI, Phillips MJ., (1995). Mangroves as filters of shrimp pond effluent: predictions and 
biogeochemical research needs. Proc. Hydrobiologia; 295:311-321. 
Sansanayuth P, Phadungchep S, Ngammontha S, Ngdngam S, Sukasem P, Hoshino H, 
Ttabucanon MS., (1996). Shrimp pond effluent: pollution problems and treatment by 
constructed wetlands. Proc. Water Sci. Technol.; 34:93-98 
Coloso RM, Borlongan IG., (1999). Significant organotin contamination of sediment and tissues 
of milkfish in brackish water ponds. Proc. Bull Environ Contam Toxicol ;63:297-304 
789 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
ECOSAN: AN INNOVATIVE APPROACH TO SANITATION IN RURAL 
BANGLADESH 
 
 
Shuvo Ramo Saha1, Khondoker Mahbub Hassan2, Md. Monzur Hossain3, Quazi Hamidul Bari4 
 
 
ABSTRACT: Sanitation refers to the principles and practices relating to the collection, treatment 
or disposal of human excreta, household wastewater and refuse as they impact on people and the 
environment. The main objective of a sanitation system is to protect and promote human health 
by providing a clean environment and breaking the cycle of diseases. In order to be sustainable, a 
sanitation system has to be not only economically viable, socially acceptable and 
technically/institutionally appropriate, but also should protect the environment and natural 
resources (Langergraber and Weissenbacher, 2010). Ecosan is increasingly recognized as a 
realistic alternative to provide safe sanitation and thereby reduce the health risks associated with 
poor sanitation. This study aims at investigating the suitability of Ecosan toilets in rural 
Bangladesh with regards to improve the human health and hygiene practice. In sanitation point of 
view, people of this village are well practiced using Ecosan toilet as a replacement of both pit 
latrines and open defecation, washing their hands with soap after defecation and before meal, 
recovering their heath from water borne diseases for launching of Ecosan toilets also induced 
public awareness on hygiene practice. Thus, the Ecosan technique would be a sustainable 
sanitation approach in the context of Bangladesh. 
 
 
Keywords: Ecological sanitation (Ecosan), hygiene practice, social acceptance, sustainable. 
 
 
1.  Introduction 
 
The term "ecology" was first suggested in 1866 by E.Haekel, a German biochemist. At present, 
the term has been expanded into more than ten disciplines of ecosystem, such as the ecotope, 
ecological economics, ecological agriculture, ecological engineering etc. Ecological sanitation 
applies the fundamentals of ecology, and takes the non-hazardousness, decrement as well as 
                                                        
1M.Sc Engineering Scholar (Environmental Engineering), Department of Civil Engineering, KUET, 
Khulna, Bangladesh, shuvo_ce04@yahoo.com 
2Associate Professor, Department of Civil Engineering, KUET, Khulna, Bangladesh, 
khmhassan@yahoo.com 
3M.Sc Engineering Scholar (Environmental Engineering), Department of Civil Engineering, KUET, 
Khulna, Bangladesh, monzurce@gmail.com 
4Professor, Department of Civil Engineering, KUET, Khulna, Bangladesh, qhbari@ce.kuet.ac.bd 
790 
 
resources recovery of human excreta as the guiding principles for the construction of ecological 
facilities, and the rational utilization of non-hazardous treated human excreta as useful resources, 
so as to achieve the purpose on health protection of human beings and ecological balance 
(Shunchang et al., 2002). The key objective of a sanitation system is to shield and endorse human 
health by providing and maintaining a clean environment without faecal contamination and by 
adopting measures that break the cycle of disease transmission. The system should be technically 
appropriate, economically feasible, socially acceptable and institutionally manageable which are 
factors that all affect the health outcomes to achieve the direct effects of containment and 
reduction of pathogenic organism. Human health and environmental impact are interlinked. 
When the products from a sanitary system should be considered as potential resources either for 
food production or for energy generation, the health issues and aspects of risk reduction need to 
be accounted for in addition to the benefits of nutrient recovery. In the technical improvement of 
existing sanitation systems or in the design and implementation of new ones, health risk 
considerations are crucial and should always be an integral part of the planning and decision 
making process (Stenstrom et al., 2011).Worldwide, about 2.6 billion people lack access to 
improved sanitation (WHO/UNICEF, 2010). Bangladesh, of which 70% of population is residing 
the rural areas, is the densely populated country in the world. Environmental problem in the 
country especially the rural areas of the Bangladesh are getting worse by the day. Inadequate 
facilities of disposal of human excreta or the traditional way of human excreta management are 
the great concern of environmental sanitation. We also know that proper sanitation positively 
affects the individual’s nutritional status, diseases resistance, income opportunities, self-esteem, 
personal security, etc. Enhanced opportunities for improved livelihoods can be achieved through 
eco-system based sanitation with radical perspective on gender balance, social development, 
agricultural production and sustainability (Chowdhury et al., 2006).The sanitization of human 
excreta is prerequisite for disease prevention and control. Based on a long time investigation and 
practical application, various types of rural household toilet such as septic tank toilet, triplet 
biogas toilet, pit toilet, urine diversion toilet, double pit toilet etc that are popularized in our rural 
community. As there is no master plan of management for collection and transportation system of 
human excreta via a sewer system including sewerage line, disposal site, and treatment facilities 
in the area, it is necessary to have not only improved toilet but sanitary excreta management. So, 
ecological sanitation (Ecosan) is the concept of dry sanitation, an innovative approach and viable 
solution to the problems cause by conventional sanitation because its benefits and advantages are 
successfully conveyed correctly shown through knowledge sharing and capacity building. The 
benefits of ecological sanitation are well-known: it does not need water to function; it protects the 
environment; and allows the nutrients in human feces and urine to be returned to the soil as 
fertilizer (Winblad and Simpson-Hebert, 2004). In this study, it has been focused on the 
suitability of Ecosan toilets in rural Bangladesh with regards to the human health protection and 
hygiene practice establishing of ecological sanitation concept which was assessed through 
questionnaire survey improved by rural population during the project period. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
791 
 
2.  Methodology 
 
2.1   Background 
 
The perception towards the sustainability of Ecosan toilets with regards to human health 
protection and hygiene practice in rural area of Keshabpur under Jessore district was studied 
using household interview and observation. The survey was carried out in South Banshbaria 
village of Sagardari Union in Keshabpur upazila under Jessore district showing in figure 1. The 
village is low lying area and located in the bank of river “Kobadak”. The survey was based on 
125 respondents of the village. Most of the residents in the villages are poor, illiterate, farmer and 
low income earners. The survey in two times was held on March, 2009 and January, 2011 for a 
period of two weeks in each survey during the project periods. Data collection was commenced 
by conducting interviews. 
 
        
(Source:en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jessore_ District)  
 
(Source: www.studycirclebd.info 
/jessore-district.html)
 
Figure 1 Location map of study area under Jessore district 
 
 
Keshabpur 
792 
 
2.2  Site selection 
 
The village was also selected because a three year Ecosan pilot project through JADE was first 
implemented there. It was sponsored by Toto limited, Japan; Mitsui Limited, Japan and 
Australian High Commission. The project was implemented in this area to improve the ecological 
sanitation among the villagers. The toilets were given out on first come first serve basis to 
residents who requested for the toilet through the project coordinator. The beneficiaries paid a 
small fee because the toilets were subsidized by the project. 
 
1.1 Household interviews and selection of respondents 
 
A sample of 125 households in each village was selected. Household interviews were conducted 
by visiting the households in the community. This was done with assistance of a guide from the 
study area to locate the household respondents’ homes. In cases where the household head or 
landlord was not present, any adult in the sampled household was interviewed. Data was 
collected using a structured questionnaire comprising both open-ended and close-ended 
questions. Questions from the questionnaire were read out to the respondent. The respondent’s 
responses to the questions were then recorded in spaces provided in the questionnaire. For open 
ended questions, the respondent was at liberty to give multiple answers and also to bring to 
discussion other issues he/she thought are relevant to the questions. While close ended questions 
necessitated the respondents to rank, accept by indicating either yes or no answers. Each 
household interview took about 30 minutes, including an introduction of the study and the 
researcher, interview of the respondent, and visit to the toilet facility. The questions were 
prepared in English language but translated into Bengali language in case the respondents felt 
more comfortable than speaking in English. However, some respondents were not willing to give 
information or be interviewed because they were busy at their work place while others were 
simply not interested because they have been interviewed several times by other researchers and 
that they have not seen any changes as a result. This necessitated a lot of convincing explanations 
by the interviewer to let those respondents accept to be interviewed. 
 
1.2 Field observation 
 
Field observations were carried out simultaneously with the household interview exercise. It was 
carried out to see the kind of sanitation facilities used within the community, the design of urine 
diverting toilets, their management and the general sanitation (solid waste management, drainage) 
within the areas. This method was made possible during each household’s respondent interview 
as the researcher requested to have access to the sanitation facility in the household. Photographs 
of the toilet facility present were taken to show the type, design and general situation of the 
facility. This helped to relate to some information collected in interviews. This method was used 
because one can get accurate behavioral information which is not easily provided in an interview, 
as well as physical state of subject matter being studied. It was also time-saving and minimized 
costs since it was done during household interviews. 
 
 
 
793 
 
1.3 Data analysis 
 
Information from the interviews was assigned for the various multiple responses to ease the 
analysis process. Descriptive statistics (i.e. percentages) were derived for the data analysis. 
1.4 Sustainable sanitation technique 
 
An overall simplified model of sustainable sanitation through Ecosan is shown in the figure 2 as 
follows (Chowdhury and Mamun, 2007): 
 
 
 
Figure 2 Components of sustainable sanitation 
 
 
1.5 Purpose of ecological sanitation 
 
The figure 3 shows the purposes of ecological sanitation (Sakai, 2006). In now a day, there is a 
movement called ecological sanitation (Ecosan), to apply technology which achieves human 
excreta recycling system together with satisfying sanitation function. However, installing new 
disposal site and establishing transportation system is not realistic. On the other hand, locally 
restoring resources derived from excreta corresponds to local requirement to improve deteriorated 
soil condition. Ecosan brings through sanitation improvement, locally restoring of human excreta 
so as to keep sanitary management of human excreta, reduction of environmental impacts in rural 
Bangladesh. After all, Ecosan also makes it possible to use toilet during flood period and extends 
life span of toilet.  
 
 
794 
 
 
 
Figure 3 Purposes of ecological sanitation 
 
 
2. Result and Discussion 
 
2.1 Improvement of household sanitation 
 
Households remain steady in no. of 125 in this village of South Banshbaria from year 2009 to 
2011. In table 1, result of pre-survey showed 58 out of 125 no. of households (46%) had no fixed 
toilet for defecation and 56 out of 125 no. of households (44%) used pit toilets. So it is concluded 
that sanitation facilities was very poor in 2009 in the village. Lack of awareness about good 
sanitation, superior health protection and well hygienic environment is main reason for this 
problem. In one words, they were unknown to ecological sanitation. The table 1 shows an 
improved result in 2011. In 2011, rate of open defecation has been significantly reduced from 
46% to 12% with ecological concept through providing Ecosan toilets. 
 
Table 1 Improvements of Defecation System in rural households 
 
Types of toilets using for defecation 
Year 
Pit toilet Direct pit pour flash toilet Open defecation Ecosan 
Total no. of 
households 
2009 
2010 
2011 
56 
46 
43 
9 
8 
6 
58 
41 
15 
2 
30 
61 
125 
125 
125 
 
795 
 
0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100
%
Pre Survey
Post Survey
Yes (5) 4 3 2 No(1)
0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100
%
Pre Survey
Post Survey
Yes (5) 4 3 2 No(1)
 
 
Figure 4 Improvement of household sanitation 
 
Census data on the prevalence of toilets in the area shows an improved percentage of household 
sanitation with the Ecosan toilets in figure 4. In the figure, the 2009 Census showed that only 2% 
of rural households had Ecosan toilets and about 45% of households had pit toilets. In the year 
2009, 45% of rural households in this village had no sanitation facility in or near their homes.  
After passing two years (in 2011), sanitation facilities have been improved than previous 
situation in 2009. Recently, 61 families (49% of total villagers) are using Ecosan toilets when rate 
of using pit latrines and open defecation is 35% and 12% respectively. They are well known to 
use the toilet and its benefits. The toilet has achieved good response in the area and surrounding 
the village. Most of them have constructed the toilet very closed to their houses. They are well 
practiced to keep the toilet neat and clean. They are also capable to motivate others about the 
sanitation concept through benefit analysis of the toilets. However, the families who have not 
Ecosan toilet are not feasible due to economic and land scarcity. 
 
2.2 Improvement of hygiene practice 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5(a) Hygiene practice of covering 
food stuffs and drinking water container  
Figure 5(b) Hygiene practice of washing 
their hands before meal and after defecation
 
796 
 
From above figure 5, it is observed that the comparative result of pre and post survey on hygiene 
practice in the study area. At present, above 90% people are accustomed to cover food stuffs, 
drinking water vessel showing in figure 5 (a) and wash their hands before meal and after 
defecation in toilet showing in figure 5 (b) respectively because people have been well trained 
about sanitation consciousness. Launching of Ecosan toilets also induced public awareness on 
hygiene practice. Prior to this project, the hygiene practice was below 60%. 
 
2.3 Improvement of human health 
 
Inhabitants of the village are vulnerable to water-borne diseases such as diarrhea, dysentery, skin 
diseases that are given importance in this study because inadequate access to clean water, 
malnutrition and poor sanitation facilities. Figure 6 shows that 15% more families were found to 
be conscious about diarrhea and other water borne diseases at the end of the project period. From 
the above figure 6, it is observed that diarrhea, dysentery and skin diseases have been reduced by 
50% after establishing Ecosan toilets.  
 
0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100
%
Pre Survey
Post Survey
Diarrhea Dysentry Fever
Skin disease Cold Others
 
 
Figure 6 Diseases prevalence 
 
2.4 Impact on habitual change of rural people into Ecosan 
 
The improvement of human health protection and hygiene practice has been possible due to 
Ecosan principle. The primary concept of designing the toilet is to separate feces and urine. The 
aim of separation is to keep stabilization of feces by excluding urine. Ecosan toilet uses a special 
pedestal or squat plate in which urine enters the front part of pedestal and then diverted through 
the pipe and thus separated from the feces which fall directly downwards into a chamber. The 
toilet has two feces chambers to make the feces stable and safe from diseases organisms. When 
the first chamber gets fulfilled, it is kept closed and airtight. Then, second chamber is used. After 
fulfilling the second chamber, stabilized feces will be mixed with soil in the farmland as an 
organic fertilizer by empting first one being usable. Thus the toilet can be used in cyclic order. 
This system is the substitute to digging new pit for human excreta management when old pit of 
pit toilet is filled its capacity within a few months or within a year at most. Some wood ash is 
added to cover the feces after every visit. This covers the deposit and helps to dry out the surface 
of the feces and makes them easier to handle and transfer. The distinct advantage of this method 
797 
 
is that the urine can be collected separately, making it available as a liquid fertilizer. Also the 
solid component, being in semi dry state, is much easier to handle and safer from the beginning, 
even if it does initially contain pathogens. Being semi dry, it does not smell so much and its 
potential as a fly breeding medium is much reduced compared to the mixes of urine and feces. 
Eventually, the feces become completely composted (Morgan, 2007). In Bangladesh, the popular 
habit of cleaning the anal with water after defecation calls for an extra consideration to adopt the 
drying option. The anal washing water drains to evaporation bed from where water gets 
evaporated in the process of Ecosan toilets. The system accelerates the drying process and makes 
the tank volume reduce.  
 
2.5 Impact of pathogenic organisms in Ecosan practice 
 
A large range of pathogenic organisms of viral, bacterial, parasitic protozoan and helminthes 
origins are present in feces. Few are excreted with urine. The main risks with human excreta are 
the related degree of fecal cross-contamination in these fractions. All infective organisms related 
to feces are present in anal cleaning water. In the rural Bangladesh, excreta-related diseases are 
common, with correspondingly high concentrations of excreted pathogens. The fecal pathogens 
through environmental transmission mainly cause gastro-intestinal symptoms such as diarrhoea, 
vomiting and stomach cramps. Several may also cause symptoms involving other organs and 
severe sequels or be an interrelated factor for malnutrition. In the rural areas, bacterial pathogens 
as Salmonella, Campylobacter and E. coli are of general importance, when microbial risks from 
the reuse of feces, sewage sludge or animal manure are considered. Hepatitis A is also of major 
concern and the importance of Hepatitis E is emerging, and considered a risk for both water- and 
food-borne outbreaks, especially where the sanitary standards are low. In this circumstance,  
 
 
 
Figure 7 Mortality compared to sanitation coverage for individual developing countries below 
age of 5 years 
798 
 
Ecosan is the most effective technology to reduce the microbial risks. An example of relationship 
between health status (here child mortality) and sanitation coverage with ecological sanitation in 
Sub-Saharan and South Asia with most 30% (marked by red) and 50% (marked by blue) 
respectively is shown in figure 7 (Rosemarin et al., 2008). 
 
2.6 Sanitation practice in human health 
 
Sanitation systems should serve as single or a series of obstruction, the treatment or handling 
chain that substantially reduce the number of pathogens. With technical barriers, the reduction is 
simplified to occur through different adsorption or inactivation processes. The subsequent risk of 
disease transmission is related to the remaining fraction after the barrier reduction, the usage of 
sanitation systems as well as the handling or use of the end products. The transmission pathways 
of excreta related pathogens may be either primary (through direct contact exposure) and/or 
secondary, (exposure through an external route). Primary transmission includes person to person 
contact but in this context also direct contact with feces or fecal soiled surfaces. Secondary 
transmission includes, vehicle borne (food, water etc), and vector-borne. The first is through 
contamination of e.g. crops or water sources, the second mainly through created breeding sites of 
the vectors. Exposure may occur at different points in the system, representing a risk reduction 
over several barriers. Exposed groups may also vary along the treatment/handling chain. A well 
functioning train of treatment barriers should still be assessed in relation to the interrelated risk of 
disease transmission for those using the system, handling the end products or consuming crops 
fertilized with them showing in following flowchart. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8 Flowchart of pathogens spreading from excreta of an infected individual to a healthy 
individual 
No Transmission 
Transmission and 
symptomless infection 
Transmission and 
infection with 
manifest sickness 
 Hygiene Habits 
Dietary Habits 
Exposure 
Sanitation 
Transmission Routes 
Excreted 
pathogens 
Crops, fish - 
pond 
Soil 
Water 
Insects 
Hands, person 
to person 
contact Utensils 
Food 
Cattle and 
poultry 
799 
 
2.7 Barriers of hygiene practice 
 
 
 
Figure 9 Barriers between health concern and action 
 
Table 2 Way of health contamination by pathogenic organisms 
 
Exposures Explanation 
Ingestion of excreta The transfer of excreta through direct contact to the mouth from the hands or items in contact with the mouth. 
Dermal contact The infection where a pathogen is entering through the skin (through the feet or other exposed body part) (Example hookworms) 
Contact with 
flies/mosquitoes 
Includes the mechanic transfer of excreta from a fly to a person or 
food items. Also include bites from a mosquito or other biting insects 
which could be carrying a disease 
Inhalation of aerosols 
and particles 
Refers to the inhalation of micro-droplets of water and particles which 
may not be noticeable, but which may carry a pathogen dose and 
emanate from or is a result of a sanitation technology. 
Contaminated 
ground/ surface water 
Refers to the ingestion of water, drawn from a ground or surface 
source, that is contaminated from a sanitation technology 
Contact with 
overflowing/ leaking 
contents 
Refers to subsequent contact as a result of malfunction of a sanitation 
technology. (Example - pit or tank overflowing as a result of flooding, 
groundwater intrusion or general malfunction) 
Ingestion of urine Refers to the specific case of ingestion of urine (reference to E) from handling practices of specific technologies. 
Consumption of 
contaminated 
Produce (vegetables) 
Refers to consumption of plants (Example lettuce) that have been 
grown on land irrigated or fertilized with a sanitation product or where 
accidental contamination is likely to occur. 
800 
 
The technical barriers of health protection within a sanitation system are partly governed by 
practices related to behavior. The practices define the degree of exposure related to the critical 
points within the system and corresponding transmission routes. Practices relate to individual 
habits and socio-cultural perceptions showing in figure 9 (Kollmus and Agyeman, 2002). The 
former creates risk variability due to personal hygiene and the hygienic conditions of a setting, 
reflecting individual factors as well as individual and group responsibilities. In sanitation, the 
inter linkage with cultural beliefs and religious practices for example relates to water-centered 
cleanliness including ablution, bathing after sexual intercourse and proper washing after 
defecation (Nawab et al., 2006). Acceptance and practice of use of human excreta in agriculture 
is an example of regional and local variation based on both historical practices, as well as demand 
and created interest. The perception and attitudes thus become central both related to system 
acceptance and in the relationship to health protection. When a new sanitation system is to be 
introduced into a new area, the religious, cultural and spiritual values in the local context must be 
considered (Falkenmark, 1998). Human health has been infected with transmission of pathogenic 
organisms into human body due to unhygienic practice in their daily activities found in this area 
showing in table 2. 
 
 
3. Conclusion 
 
Ecosan toilet is an approach to both improve the human health and hygiene practice in South 
Banshbaria. In addition, Ecosan can provide comfortable toilets for people in the rural area of 
Bangladesh. Ecosan toilet is not only compulsory but also ecological concept with hygiene 
practice is most imperative for the rural people to lead themselves diplomatic life. It is an 
appropriate technology to improve the poor sanitation situation. Acceptance of Ecosan 
technology in this area is good. Ecosan technology is considered as most expectable alternative 
for sanitation facilities in place of pit latrines and open defecation in context of rural Bangladesh.  
 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
The authors would like to express deep gratitude  to Non-profitable International Organization 
named Japan Association of Drainage and Environment (JADE) that implemented the project, 
financed by Toto Limited, Japan; Mitsui Limited, Japan and Australian High Commission for the 
study. Many thanks go in particular to the rural people who helped us to complete the project 
successfully. Finally, we express our gratefulness to the God. 
 
 
References 
 
Chowdhury M.H. and Mamun  A.A. (2007) Ecosan: An alternative approach to sustainable 
sanitation development in Bangladesh, In: Ecological sanitation: An Intermediate Technology 
for Environmental Management, Chowdhury M.H., Sakai A. and Mamun  A.A. (eds), vol. 2, 
BARD, Kotabari, Comilla 
801 
 
Chowdhury M.H. et. al. (2006) Ecological sanitation and eco-toilets: Basic concepts and issues, 
In: Ecological sanitation: An Intermediate Technology for Environmental Management, 
Chowdhury M.H., Sakai A. and Mamun  A.A. (eds), vol. 1, BARD, Kotabari, Comilla 
Falkenmark M. (1998) Willful neglect of water: Pollution - A major barrier to overcome, 
Stockholm International Water Institute Waterfront, Stockholm, Sweden 
Kollmus A. and Agyeman J. (2002) Mind the Gap: Why Do People Act Environmentally and 
What Are the Barriers to Pro-Environmental Behavior, In: Environmental Education Research 
8 (3), pp. 239-60 
Langergraber G. and Weissenbacher N. (2010) Introduction to the ROSA project - Journal of 
Sustainable Sanitation Practice, 4, 4-8. 
Morgan P. (2007) Toilets That Make Compost (Low-cost, sanitary toilets that produce valuable 
compost for crops in an African context), In: EcoSanRes Programme, Stockholm 
Environmental Institute, Stockholm, Sweden, ISBN: 978-9-197-60222-8 
Nawab B. et al. (2006) Cultural Preferences in Designing Ecological Sanitation Systems, Nortyh 
West Fronteir Province, Pakistan, Journal of Environ, Psycho, 26, pp. 236-246. 
Rosemarin et.al. (2008) Pathways for Sustainable Sanitation- Achieving the Millennium 
Development Goals, SEI/IWA 
Sakai A. (2006) The state of sanitation facilities in Bangladesh and improvement toward 
ecological sanitation, In: Ecological sanitation: An Intermediate Technology for 
Environmental Management, Chowdhury M.H., Sakai A. and Mamun  A.A. (eds), vol. 1, 
BARD, Kotabari, Comilla 
Shunchang P. et. al. (2002) Ecological sanitation and human health, Institute of Environmental 
Health and Engineering, China Academy of Preventive Medicine Beijing 100050 
Stenstrom T.A. et. al. (2011) Microbial Exposure and Health Assessments in Sanitation 
Technologies and Systems, In: EcoSanRes Programme, Stockholm Environmental Institute, 
Stockholm, Sweden, ISBN: 978-91-86125-36-3 
WHO/UNICEF (2010) Progress on Sanitation and Drinking Water 
Winblad, U. and Simpson-Hébert, M. (2004) Ecological sanitation –revised and enlarged 
edition, Stockholm Environmental Institute, Stockholm, Sweden, ISBN: 91-88714-98-5 
 802 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
PUBLIC TRANSPORT VERSUS PRIVATE TRANSPORT: WHICH COULD BE THE 
BETTER OPTION FOR A MEGA CITY, DHAKA? 
 
 
Mir Alimullah Faruque 1 and Md. Sabbir Sharif2 
 
 
ABSTRACT: Dhaka, capital of Bangladesh is now one of the most densely populated cities of 
the world. The city area is only 360 square kilometer and about 14 million people living in this 
small area. So, the generation of traffic in a small area is huge, and the people of the city face 
huge traffic congestion. The traffic operating conditions on the streets of Dhaka are deteriorating 
day by day. The increase in population over the years, through natural growth and high rural to 
urban migration has resulted in a situation where its transport services are no longer able to 
respond efficiently to the travel needs of its residents. There is also miss management of the 
growth of the city, as there is only 8% road network where it should be 25% for a convenient city 
and for fast movement. But the government never thought of that ever before or imagined of a 
picture of the present traffic of the city area. But there is always an alternative way of 
overcoming a problem and this paper will basically focus on the way out of such a situation. The 
problem solving issues would be technical, policy related but not financial need as our country is 
already running with a huge number of people who are poor. So, in this paper an attempt has been 
made to seek out the better options for transportation system among both public and private 
sector and find out which could be the better option. 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Dhaka, a megacity and the capital of Bangladesh has one of the fastest urbanization rate in the 
world. The current density of the city is about 44,000 people per sq. km. and it can be demarcated 
up to 360 sq. km. as urban area consisting of 90 wards. Due to the small area and high density of 
the area, it doesn’t have enough road space for the users of the road. As a fact of rapid 
urbanization, the land uses change, rural-urban migration rate, improvement of lifestyle and many 
others reasons have indirectly affected the traffic system of the city. So, these days the past 
developed roads are failing to support the present traffic due to back date design pattern of the 
roads, the frequent intersections, and many other reasons which are making the city detrimental 
for living. 
 
1.1. Background of the study  
 
The developed countries of the world have already taken advanced steps to mitigate their 
                                                        
1Student, Master of Disaster Management, University of Dhaka. 
2Urban Planner, BETS Consulting Services Ltd., Bangladesh. 
 803 
transport problems and solve them with everyone’s acceptance. But in our country decision is 
made by the government with collaboration with some unskilled persons to reach a proper 
decision, which leads not to a solution but to another problem. Now-a-days the traffic condition 
of the city is getting worsen of Dhaka city.  So, to get a proper solution, survey was performed 
based on purposive sampling. 
  
1.2. Objectives of the study  
 
The study was performed based on some objectives to be determined what goals to achieve in 
this research. The objectives were as follows: 
 An analysis of the causes behind the traffic congestion problem of Dhaka City,  
 A discussion and critical analysis of the present planning, and  
 A discussion of possible ways to overcome the problem.  
 
1.3. Methodology 
 
Total questionnaire survey was conducted on 200 persons while travelling from one place to 
another at different locations of the city. Firstly, secondary data as internet, books, journal and the 
data of different organization working with transport management and designing has been 
reviewed, before starting the work. Then based on the primary data as the questionnaire survey, 
has been analyzed using Microsoft Excel and SPSS software. Finally, the report was prepared 
based on the primary and secondary data with proper reference. 
 
 
2. Description of the Study Area  
 
Dhaka situated at the center of the country named Bangladesh, attracting people all over the 
country. Geographically Dhaka is located at 23°42′0″N 90°22′30″E/ 23.7°N 90.375°E, on the 
eastern banks of the Buriganga River. The city lies on the lower reaches of the Ganges Delta.  
 
The following are the brief details of Dhaka: 
 Dhaka’s population as percent of Bangladesh – nearly 40 percent of total urban 
population 
 Poverty incidence – around 50 percent (highest in Asian cities) 
 Dhaka’s contribution to country’s GDP – nearly 15 percent 
 Road network–3000km (with only 450km primary & secondary/ collector roads) 
 Road vehicles nearly 250,000 with huge number of rickshaws (500,000) 
 Trip percent catered by Mass Transport – 10 percent. 
 Cost of congestion and accidents – Tk. 3,000 crore (US$ 520 million per annum) 
 Air pollution and noise level 4 (in 1-10 scale) 
 Urban road accident fatalities – 400 (reported per annum) 
 Percent road fatalities who are pedestrians -60 percent 
 Non-existent of qualified traffic engineering professionals. 
(Source: Hossain, 2006) 
 
 
 
 804 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1 Map of the study area 
 
1. The current view of the city’s traffic system 
 
Dhaka’s road network was developed based on the small sized non-motorized transport su
ch as the most popular vehicle the rickshaw and the roads were narrow which could onl
y give access to these vehicles. But as the modernized and urbanized, the demand for im
proved facilities increased at very fast pace after the 1990s. As a result the demand for 
private motorized vehicles increased but with that rate the roads were not widened or ne
w roads were not built to support the increasing population. So, many problems are foun
d these days such as- 
 
3.1. The narrow streets of the city 
 
The old Dhaka has this problem as mentioned earlier the city was mainly dependent on 
non-motorized traffic so these narrow streets were then the only way of walking or the r
ickshaws and vans to pass by. Dhaka City also has very inadequate road networks, whic
h are only 8 or 10 percent of the total city area, whereas the acceptable ratio is 25 perc
ent. Greater Dhaka has a total road network of approximately 2230km of which 25% are
 805 
 primary roads. The width of the roads varies from 6 to 40 m. The main roads are 15 t
o 25 m wide, newly built roads are 40 m wide while the roads in the older part of Dha
ka are less than 6 m wide (independent-bangladesh.com). 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Photograph 2: Pictorial views of the narrow streets of the city 
 
3.2. Trip distribution  
 
Almost 60 percent of the 8.5 million weekday person trips are walk trips, and about 19.2 percent 
are by rickshaw (tricycle). For the remaining 20 percent of trips on motorized modes, 1.4 percent 
uses an auto-rickshaw (three-wheeler), 9.2 percent travel by bus, 3.1 percent travel by private car, 
and 6.7 percent travel by various other modes (Hossain, 2006).  
 
3.3. The haphazard development of the city 
 
The city developed since the 1990s in a very haphazard way not maintaining any rules 
regulations and amazing that the city did not have any kind of updated master plan to guide the 
development. The developers were given freedom to rise the buildings without any rules and 
today the impact of the development of that period is putting pressure on the service activities of 
the city area. The density of some area is more than 50,000 people per square kilometer but there 
is not that much facility to support the traffic system of that area. 
 
3.4. The problems in road design  
 
The city area lacks of developed road network system. The problems are that the road includes 
intersections at a very close distance which creates the vehicles delay and one of the major 
reasons for forming traffic congestion.  
 
 
 
 
 
 806 
3.5. Low prices of fuel  
 
Ever since the gas (Compressed Natural Gas-CNG) enabled private cars were introduced in the 
city, the access to the cars have increased at a very fast pace. The following chart might give an 
idea about how the people are interested in having a private vehicle 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2 View of three intersections 
Distance: A-B (Asad Gate-Aarong Mor) is 856 feet and B-C (Aarong Mor-Dhanmondi-27) is 680 
feet (Source: Google Earth, 2010) 
 
Table 1 Number of year wise registered motor vehicles in Dhaka 
Serial 
no. 
Types of Vehicles Up to 
2003 
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Jul-09 Grand 
Total 
1 Motor Car 87866 4734 5633 7403 10244 13749 12905 142534 
2 Microbus/Jeep 32391 2114 3303 4548 4372 5077 5979 57784 
3 Taxi 9369 523 514 266 0 0 0 10672 
4 Bus 2614 779 728 949 1082 1144 566 7862 
5 Minibus 7460 368 118 75 77 107 44 8249 
6 Truck 20342 1437 1104 1480 830 1642 1660 28495 
7 Auto-Rickshaw 10687 2344 139 230 121 155 593 14269 
8 Motor-Cycle 119299 7872 12879 16284 17303 23713 13629 210979 
9 Others 13187 1300 2361 2728 2913 2550 2329 27368 
 Total 303215 21471 26779 33963 36942 48137 37705 508212 
Source: Bangladesh Road Transport Authority, 2010 
 
 
A
B
C
 807 
3.6. The development of educational institutions within the residential areas  
 
Another major problem of traffic jam is the development of the educational institutions in the 
high density residential area and attracting people outside the area. This is completely against the 
planning laws of neighborhood design. And now-a-days it is astonishing to say that some 
Universities are built within the residential areas which are attracting people even outside the city 
area. 
Table 2 Intersection descriptions 
Intersection and 
Approach Name of the Approach 
No. of lanes in 
each direction 
Width 
of 
lane (m) 
Percentage of 
vehicle types 
(Car : Auto-
rickshaw : 
Mini-bus : 
Bus) 
Gul -1 Approach -1 
Gul -1 Approach - 2 
Gul -1 Approach - 3 
Gul -1 Approach - 4 
Gul -2 Approach - 1 
Gul -2 Approach - 2 
Gul -2 Approach -3 
Gul -2 Approach - 4 
kalabagan Approach-1 
kalabagan Approach-2 
kata Ban Approach-1 
kata Ban Approach-2 
Nilkhet Approach -1 
Nilkhet Approach -2 
Shahbag Approach-1 
Shahbag Approach-2 
Shahbag Approach-3 
Shahbag Approach-4 
Science Lab Approach-
1 
Science Lab Approach-
2 
Zero Point Approach-1 
Zero Point Approach-2 
Zero Point Approach-3 
High Court 
Tikatuli 
Gulshan Avenue 
Bir Uttom Mir Sowkat Sarak 
Gulshan Avenue 
Gulshan Avenue 
Bir Uttom Mir Sowkat Sarak 
Bir Uttom Mir Sowkat Sarak 
Nazmul Haque Avenue 
kamal Ataturk Avenue 
Mirpur Road 
Mirpur Road 
Elephant Road 
New Elephant Road 
Mirpur Road 
Azimpur Road 
kazi Nazrul Islam Avenue 
kazi Nazrul Islam Avenue 
Mowlana Hamid khan 
Bhasani Road 
Elephant Road 
Mirpur Road 
Mirpur Road 
Abdul Goni Road 
Abdul Goni Road 
Shahid Nazrul Islam Sarani 
College Road 
Hatkhola Road 
3 
3 
3 
3 
4 
4 
3 
4 
3 
3 
2 
2 
3 
3 
3 
2 
3 
2 
3 
2 
3 
3 
3 
2 
2 
3.42 
3.66 
3.55 
3.41 
3.21 
3.05 
3.66 
3.10 
3.40 
3.33 
3.11 
3.30 
3.97 
3.86 
3.51 
4.39 
4.18 
4.18 
3.38 
3.20 
3.08 
3.48 
3.43 
3.45 
3.33 
78:20:1:1 
72:19:4:5 
62:24:1:13 
62:23:8:7 
72:20:1:7 
74:20:2:4 
65:24:5:6 
66:21:6:7 
58:18:8:16 
61:19:4:16 
43:19:25:13 
66:20:1:13 
50:15:8:27 
40:26:3:30 
69:29:0:2 
73:25:1:1 
46:23:2:29 
49:19:18:14 
52:16:12:20 
46:19:18:17 
52:21:0:27 
53:20:7:21 
48:26:7:20 
61:28:0:11 
42:22:4:32 
 
     
3.7. The presence of road and rail line on the same ground level 
 
The existing "intercity rail line" passes through the four important Central Business Districts and 
a number of important and busy roads of Dhaka City. When a train passes, lots of vehicles have 
to wait near the rail crossing, which causes serious traffic congestion at the interval of every 15 
minutes as an average (independent-bangladesh.com). 
Source: Saha, Hossain, Mahmud, & Islam, 2010 
 808 
 
4. Road user’s point of view 
 
The people who are using the road have the right to say what i their opinion about the transport 
improvement of the city. We found some interesting answers regarding the traffic problem issue 
of the city. The analysis of the data is presented in the following chart- 
Source: Field Survey, 2010. 
Figure 3 Road user’s point of view 
 
5. Government’s step 
 
New Dhaka Transportation Proposal under STP - The government of Bangladesh has 
embarked on a very ambitious project. The Ministry of Communication together with the DCC 
(DTCB), has commissioned a twenty year Strategic Transport Plan (STP). The development 
period of this plan is 2004 to 2024. The STP has three major component parts. It has a ROADS 
(+++) component of some 72 Roads and elevated highways project to be built within the existing 
City including covering the expansion of area up to the Balu River on the east side of the city. 
These Roads network are to be developed by various line agencies in three broad phases.The 
second component of the STP is a proposal for a Bus Rapid Transport (BRT) system. This will be 
three bus lines on grade on existing roads, but with separate designated lane exclusive to bus 
system. Like the Roads, this system will also be developed in two major phases, as an interim 
system prior to the implementation of the METRO system.The third component of the STP plan 
is a proposal to develop some 60 kilometers of, three line Mass Rapid Transport (MRT) (Metro) 
system. This again will be a combination of above ground and underground grade separated 
Metro Rail system. It has been proposed in the STP plan that the METRO system of three lines 
be developed in a span of some twenty years (by 2024).But the STP carries very much criticism 
as ours is one of the least developed countries of the world and one of the poorest country. But 
installing Metro Rail Transit requires much financial support, where the people don’t get to eat 
two times a day the government is thinking of what might fail after installing such a costly 
transport system. So, the government should focus on the policies which require guidelines and 
good commitment to improve the city condition not physical planning. The reasons are clarified 
 809 
in the next part of the writing. 
 
 
6. Recommendations  
 
6.1. Private cars should be removed in pick hours  
 
The private cars also can be removed from the major roads during the pick hour (8am-8pm) and 
allow only the rickshaws to travel in the communities for short trips. The commercial area should 
pedestrian facilated. The private cars should be removed because as a normal calculation shows 
that about two cars occupies space of a bus but only gives place to only maximum space for ten 
people to travel; on the other hand a bus can easily carry fifty people (Figure 5). So, the mass 
transportation is needed but before that controlling measure should be taken people to discourage 
towards own vehicles. Concentration must be given to the major traveling people and the present 
buses can support the present people in the city. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Photograph 2 Comparison between car and bus’s road occupancy 
 
6.2. Water transport should be improved 
 
As the heavy vehicles like trucks have to wait from 8 am to 8 pm from entering Dhaka city and 
pass through the city. That is 12 hours delay. But if we start a transport route through the River 
Buriganga by ferrying the heavy vehicles and even the passengers from Gabtoli to Narayanganj 
and Narayanganj to Gabtoli, than it will not put any pressure on the transport system in the city. 
 
6.3. Facilities of public service should be increased 
The buses should be of sitting service and should avoid the permission of more than one 
company to serve in a particular route. The government should also see that the cost of traveling 
is low and the company provides the best service. 
 
 
 
 810 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.4. Equal thinking should come 
 
It can be said that the transportation system of Dhaka city should be equal to all the people of the 
city, because the greater number of people are poor in the city and they work hard. The 
congestion also makes the traveler tired and they don’t give their best at work. It also takes our 
economy backwards because one hour delay in the delivery of goods due to congestion than the 
earning from that delivery is delayed. So, it can be a cycle through which it also affects our 
economy. 
 
7. Conclusion 
 
All additional forms of public transport, such as light railway/tramways, which are capable of 
carrying a lot of passengers at a time and are also environment-friendly. Emphasis must be placed 
on public transport rather than private ones. Transport rules of all major developed cities should 
be adopted. All rickshaw-pullers, bicycle-riders and motor cycle riders must be fully trained 
along with scooter/taxi, and bus/truck/lorry drivers and they must obey traffic rules including 
pedestrian crossings. International traffic signaling systems should be followed. 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
First of all, we would like to thank all mighty Allah. Also we would like to thank our family 
members, friends and teachers. 
 
References 
 
Hossain, M.(2006).  Issues and Realities of BRT Planning Initiatives in Developing Asian cities. 
Journal of Public Transportation, 2006 BRT Special Edition , pp.69-87. 
Saha, P., Hossain, Q. S.,Mahmud, H. M., & Islam, M. Z. (2009). Passenger Car Equivalent (Pce) 
of Through Vehicles At Signalized Intersections In Dhaka Metropolitan City, Bangladesh. 
ATSS ReSeARch Vol.33 No.2 ,  pp.99-104. 
http://independent-bangladesh.com/news/feb/08/08022006op.htm (Retrieved on 16th July, 2011) 
Figure 4 Two approaches for transport planning 
811 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
EFFECTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE ON RICE PRODUCTION OF SYLHET REGION 
 
 
M Aktarul Islam Chowdhury1 and Wasif E Elahi2 
 
 
ABSTRACT: There is only one earth to live, obviously living bodies particularly animal and 
men have to sustain in the earth adapting with the existing natural environment whatever  be the 
as usual phenomena or by hook and crook.  Unfortunately normal life cycle is being disrupted 
due to many unanticipated natural calamities and antecedents especially climate change hazards.  
Now-a-days climate change is a burning issue as the world is going to a burning situation day by 
day with the unexpected increase of temperature throughout the world due to various man-made 
activities and unpredicted natural hazards. Main cause of the climate change is human activities, 
exactly we men are the cause. Effects of climate change are vast on the various elements of the 
environment. Due to climate change, temperature, rainfall, soil condition, water level, sea level 
and a number of other parameters and properties of the natural environment are changing rapidly 
for instance, today, the earth is hotter than it was hundred or thousand years ago as 1990s was the 
warmest decade and 1998 was the warmest year; snow cover is down 10% in last 40 years; 
annual total rainfall increased by 120mm and post-monsoon rainfall increased by about 60mm; 
sea level is rising day by day. Consequently climate change has the adverse effect on many 
natural attributes causing need factors of living world mainly man, animals and plants such as 
different crops in particular food production. Temperature and rainfall intensity have a direct 
influence on the production of crops that changes the condition of the soil properties and affects 
the production rate of the crops hampering the future food security to a vulnerable condition.  
This study includes analysis of data of temperature, data of rainfall and the production rate of rice 
of the year 1975 to 2010 in Sylhet located in the north-eastern region of Bangladesh. In this study 
a try has made to make direct relation between changes of production rate of rice with the change 
of climate. 
 
Keyword: Agriculture, Bangladesh, Climate change, production rate of rice, rainfall, temperature. 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Towards a warming world, it can’t be future of the world. Our world is geared up for more 
warmth if current land use systems are not altered, according to The State of the World Report 
(2009). The report, recently released by The Worldwide Watch Institute (2009), found that land 
and land use changes account for approximately 31% of total human-induced greenhouse gas 
emissions. According to the Third Assessment Report of IPCC, South Asia is the most vulnerable 
                                                   
1Professor, CEE Department,SUST, Sylhet, Bangladesh. aic_cee@yahoo.com  
2Research Student, CEE Department, SUST, Bangladesh.wasiftausif@yahoo.com 
812 
 
region of the world to climate change impacts (McCarthy et al., 2001). The international 
community also recognizes that Bangladesh ranks high in the list of most vulnerable countries on 
earth. Its majority of population, being dependent on crop agriculture which is highly influenced 
by climatic variability and change, will be the most vulnerable. From such point of views a study 
was undertaken by Civil and Environmental Engineering Department of Shahjalal University of 
Science and Technology with the following specific objectives: 
 To understand the trend of temperature variation. 
 To understand the trend of production rate of various types of rice. 
 
 
2. Methodology 
 
Daily average Dry Bulb Temperature data in Celsius is collected from Meteorological 
Department of Bangladesh, Dhaka. Then by thorough study the data, the maximum average and 
minimum average temperature for each month of the year 1975 to 2008 was found out.  
   Various types of rice production data of Sylhet region are collected from the Annual Year 
book of Bangladesh Statistical Bureau. In this study,  analysis the data of temperature of the year 
1975 to 2008 in each month of year by plotting monthly maximum and minimum average 
temperature, production rate of Aush, Aman, Boro and Hybrid Aush of over study period was 
included and the production trend line of production rate was found out. 
 
 
3. Results and Data Analysis 
 
3.1. Temperature variation 
 
In the month of January, maximum temperature was varied from 19.60C in the year 1975 to 
20.60C in the year 2008 while minimum temperature ranged from 15.90C in the year 1975 to 15.6 
0C in the year 2008 as shown in figure 1. The maximum average temperature of this 34 years 
period is recorded as 20.6°C and the minimum average temperature 16.27°C. In year 1997, a 
large variation found between maximum & minimum temperature the ranges of 28.6°C to 23.3°C. 
For the maximum temperature correlation factor is 0.080, which denotes an average correlation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure. 1 Temperature variation of January over 1975 to 2008 
813 
 
In the month of March, maximum temperature was varied from 28.50C in the year 1975 to 26.40C 
in the year 2008 while minimum temperature ranged from 210C in the year 1975 to 18.80C in the 
year 2008 as shown in figure 2. The maximum average temperature of this 34 years period is 
recorded as 27.13°C and the minimum average temperature 20.22°C. For the maximum 
temperature, correlation factor is 0.006 while for the minimum temperature, correlation factor is 
0.003, and both correlation factors denote poor correlation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure. 2 Temperature variation of March over 1975 to 2008 
 
In the month of April, maximum temperature was varied from 29.80C in the year 1975 to 30.30C 
in the year 2008 while minimum temperature ranged from 220C in the year 1975 to 24.80C in the 
year 2008 as shown in figure 3. The maximum average temperature of this 34 years period is 
recorded as 28.93°C and the minimum average temperature 22.26°C. For the maximum 
temperature correlation factor is 0.003 which denotes a bad correlation while for the minimum 
temperature, correlation factor is 0.039 denotes average correlation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure. 3 Temperature variation of April over 1975 to 2008 
 
In the month of May, maximum temperature was varied from 29.50C in the year 1975 to 30.50C 
in the year 2008 while minimum temperature ranged from 220C in the year 1975 to 24.20C in the 
year 2008 as shown in figure 4. The maximum average temperature of this 34 years period is 
recorded as 29.9°C and the minimum average temperature 22.76°C. For the maximum 
814 
 
temperature correlation factor is 0.090 which denotes good correlation while for the minimum 
temperature, correlation factor is 0.105 which denotes good correlation also. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4 Temperature variation of May over 1975 to 2008 
 
In the month of July, maximum temperature was varied from 29.10C in the year 1975 to 30.10C in 
the year 2008 while minimum temperature ranged from 23.30C in the year 1975 to 25.50C in the 
year 2008 as shown in figure 5. The maximum average temperature of this 34 years period is 
recorded as 30.11°C and the minimum average temperature 25.28°C. For the maximum 
temperature, correlation factor is 0.010 which denotes a bad correlation while for the minimum 
temperature; correlation factor is 0.064 which denotes average correlation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure. 5 Temperature variation of July over 1975 to 2008 
 
In the month of August, maximum temperature was varied from 31.10C in the year 1975 to 320C 
in the year 2008 while minimum temperature ranged from 24.70C in the year 1975 to 25.20C in 
the year 2008 as shown in figure 6. The maximum average temperature of this 34 years period is 
recorded as 30.68°C and the minimum average temperature 25.72°C.  
 
 
 
 
815 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure. 6 Temperature variation of August over 1975 to 2008 
 
In the month of December, maximum temperature was varied from 20.50C in the year 1976 to 
22.90C in the year 2008 while minimum temperature ranged from 17.50C in the year 1975 to 
18.60C in the year 2008 as shown in figure 7. The maximum average temperature of this 33 years 
period is recorded as 21.62°C and the minimum average temperature 17.53°C. In year 1981, a 
large variation found between maximum and minimum temperature ranges are 24°C to 17.2°C. 
For the maximum temperature, correlation is 0.042 which denotes average correlation while for 
the minimum temperature; correlation is 0.027 which denotes bad correlation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
Figure. 7 Temperature variation of December over 1975 to 2008 
 
3.2. Variation of Rice Production 
 
3.2.1. Rice production variation: Aman Rice 
 
In study period of 1975 t0 2008 year, broadcast Aman production rate is increasing day by day 
with so many fluctuations in so many years as shown in figure 8. It’s happened due to change of 
various environmental parameters. Over study period average maximum temperature is 21.05°C 
and minimum temperature is 16.65°C.  
816 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure. 8 Production rate of Broadcast Aman rice over 1975 to 2008(Base period: Dec & Jan) 
 
In year 1996 a large variation between maximum and minimum temperature was found in the 
range of 26.25°C to 21°C and production rate was 48.71% (MT/Acre) which means 48.71 metric 
ton from per 100 acre as shown in figure 13. Optimum temperature for maximum photosynthesis 
ranges between 25°C to 30°C for rice under the climatic condition of Bangladesh. This range 
varies on the species of the rice plant. Generally the range is between 24°C to 28°C (may be vary 
2°c). (Basak, 2009)  
  For the maximum temperature, correlation factor is 0.104 which denotes good correlation 
while for the minimum temperature; correlation factor is 0.000 which denotes no change. For 
production rate, correlation factor is 0.706, which denotes very good correlation. 
 
3.2.2. Rice production variation: Boro Rice 
 
In study period of 1975 t0 2008 year, Boro production rate is increasing day by day with so many 
fluctuations in so many years as shown in figure 9. It’s happened due to change of various 
environmental parameters. Over study period average maximum temperature is 28.66°C and 
minimum temperature is 21.73°C.  
   In 1976, Boro production rate was 33% (MT/Acre) whether average maximum temperature 
was 28.53°C and minimum temperature was 21.13°C. Over study period maximum production 
rate 86.198% (MT/Acre) occurred in 2004 whether average maximum temperature was 29.26°C 
and average minimum temperature was 21.13°C as shown in figure 14. For the maximum 
temperature, correlation factor is 0.026 which denotes bad correlation while for the minimum 
temperature is 0.104, which is good correlation. For production rate, correlation factor is 0.706, 
which denotes very good correlation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
817 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 9 Production rate of Boro rice over 1975 to 2008(Base period: Mar, Apr & May) 
 
3.2.3. Rice production variation: Aush Rice 
 
In study period of 1975 t0 2008 year, Aush production rate is increasing day by day with so many 
fluctuations in so many years as shown in figure 10 but increasing rate is lower than other rice. 
Over study period average maximum temperature is 30.37°C and minimum temperature is 
25.50°C.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure. 10 Production rate of Aush rice over 1975 to 2008(Base period: July & August) 
 
In 2004, Aush production rate was 34.15% (MT/Acre) whether average maximum temperature 
was 29.8°C and minimum temperature was 25.5°C. Over study period maximum production rate 
60.49% (MT/Acre) occurred in 2005 whether average maximum temperature was 30.45°C and 
average minimum temperature was 26.05°C. In 1987, a flood occurred during the Aush season, 
so the production rate decreased at 3.25% though the temperature variation was good. For the 
maximum temperature, correlation factor is 0.033 which denotes average correlation while the 
correlation factor of minimum temperature is 0.097 which denotes good correlation. For 
production rate, correlation factor is 0.550 which denotes very good correlation. 
 
818 
 
3.2.4. Rice production variation: Hybrid Aush Rice 
 
In study period of 1975 t0 2008 year, Hybrid Aush production rate is almost same though the 
curve is showing so many fluctuations in so many years as shown in figure 11. Over study period 
average maximum temperature is 30.37°C and average minimum temperature is 25.50°C. This 
temperature is almost same as the optimum temperature (25 to 300C) for photosynthesis of rice. 
Average production rate of percentage of hybrid Aush is 78.08% (MT/Acre) which is much good 
than other species of rice production.In 1981, production rate was 99.98%, almost 100% 
(MT/Acre) whether average maximum temperature was 30.25°C and average minimum 
temperature 25.15°C. Lowest production rate, 49.98% (MT/Acre) was occurred in 1976 whether 
average maximum temperature was 29.25°C and average minimum temperature was 24.6°C.  
   For the maximum temperature, correlation factor is 0.028 which denotes average correlation 
while correlation factor of the minimum temperature is 0.097 which denotes good correlation. 
For production rate, correlation factor is 0.000, which denotes no change.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure. 11 Production rate of Hybrid Aush rice over 1975 to 2008(Base period: July & August) 
 
4. Discussion  
 
There is large variation of temperature all over the month of analyzing period from 1975 to 2008 
as shown in table 1. Analysis of temperature variation shows that the higher temperature variation 
occurs in the months of September, August, December, January, April, May and February being 
the highest variation in the month of February. 
 
Tab. 1 Temperature Variations 
 
Month Maximum 
temperature variation 
In °C 
Minimum temperature 
variation 
In °C 
Max Variation in 
study period of 33 
years 
In °C 
Variation 
For 100 
years  
In °C 
January +1.0 Almost 0 +1.0 3.030 
February +0.2 +1.5 +1.5 4.545 
819 
 
March -0.1 +0.5 +0.5 1.515 
April +0.1 +1.0 +1.0 3.030 
May +0.5 +1.2 +1.2 3.636 
June +0.5 +0.5 +0.5 1.515 
July +0.2 +0.5 +0.5 1.515 
August +0.8 +0.8 +0.8 2.424 
September +0.3 +0.7 +0.7 2.121 
October +1.0 -0.2 -0.2 -0.606 
November +0.3 -0.1 +0.3 0.909 
December +0.8 +0.7 +0.8 2.424 
 
Note:  
 + sign indicating the increasing rate of temperature variation. 
 - sign indicating the decreasing rate of temperature variation. 
 All the results have got by the studying from 1975 to 2008 years temperature data over 
33 years. 
 Bold value of temperature variation is vulnerable. 
From the monthly temperature variation chart, correlation values of the average maximum and 
average minimum temperature are determined. In January, larger correlation value is .080 for 
average maximum temperature; so after 50years, average maximum temperature will be 24.6°C, 
which is ok for rice production. Similarly, it can predict average maximum and average minimum 
temperature for 12 month for next 50years and 100years. Predicted future temperature for 50 
years and hundred years are given in table 2. 
 
Tab. 2 Temperature prediction 
 
After 50 years 
(2058) 
After 100 years 
(2108) 
Month 
Average max 
temp In °C 
Average min temp 
In °C 
Average max 
temp In °C 
Average min temp 
In °C 
January 24.6 16.32 28.6 16.37 
February 23.05 22.85 28.4 23.15 
March 27.43 20.37 27.73 20.52 
April 29.08 24.21 29.23 26.16 
May 34.4 28.01 38.9 33.26 
June 31.5 26.56 32.7 28.76 
July 30.61 28.48 31.68 31.11 
August 31.73 28.67 32.78 31.62 
September 32.77 27.96 34.57 31.11 
820 
 
October 33.6 23.39 38.6 23.59 
November 26 21.03 26.25 21.13 
December 23.72 18.88 25.82 20.23 
 
From table 2 it is evident that, in near future temperature  for instance within 50 years, the 
temperature will go over  the optimum temperature for photosynthesis of rice 25°C to 30°C in 
the month of April, May, June, July, August, September, October and it may also affect the other 
crops. This temperature will reduce the photosynthesis rate and farmers will not get their 
expected production rate. Obviously, the optimized photosynthesis for rice required for the 
climatic condition of Bangladesh is not maintained smoothly; temperatures of months are 
fluctuating at a large range although temperature is increasing at a significant rate. The 
fluctuation of various types of rice growth is not always constant due to the fact that temperature 
is sometime increasing and again at times decreasing based on the climatic parameters especially 
temperature. 
 
5. Conclusion 
 
From the conducted study it is easily evident that temperature of every month is increasing at a 
significant rate. Most vulnerable months for rice are April, May, June, July, August, September, 
October with significant rate of temperature increasing. In near future, temperature will exceed 
the optimized range, and then farmers will not get their expected rate of growth. Obviously 
researchers involved in the agricultural fields have to find out new season for rice production, it 
may be in the month of November to April. Now it is the perfect time to research on new season 
of rice and new hybrid species of rice which have better tolerance range of temperature. 
Otherwise our future generation will have to pay much near future.    
 
References 
 
Basak, Kumar Jayanta, 2009; Climate change impact on Rice Production in Bangladesh: A Modeling Study  
The Worldwide Watch Institute, 2009; The state of world report 
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change  (IPCC, 2007); Third Assessment Report of IPCC.  
 
 821 
ICETCESD 2012 
March10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
OXYGEN UPTAKE BEHAVIOUR OF ACTIVE SETTLED SLUDGE COLLECTED 
FROM MUNICIPAL SEWER LINE: A RESPIROMETRIC STUDY 
 
 
                        M.S. Rahman1, M.A. Islam2, M.S.A. Amin3 and M. Haque4 
 
 
ABSTRACT: Oxygen Uptake Rate (OUR) is an important parameter for measuring 
biodegradation of organic substances. Oxygen uptake rate increasingly is employed to obtain bio-
kinetic characteristics, and it is considered one of the most important information sources. OUR 
Biodegradability tests provide respirogram shows the actual view of the microorganism’s 
metabolic activity in wastewater sample like an echocardiogram provides information about the 
actual condition of heart. Locally fabricated respirometer is developed to measure the 
biodegradability test of domestic, medical and industrial wastewater sample. This paper shows 
the advancement made in Biological Oxygen Demand (BOD) measurement primarily, replacing 
it by OUR, to minimize the time and negate the measurement difficulties. 
 
Keywords: BOD, OUR, Respirometer, Wastewater, Sludge. 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Chemical ingredients production is increased from one million ton to four hundred million tons 
since 1930 to present day. These chemicals bring about benefits, on which modern society is 
entirely dependent, but then certain chemicals have caused serious damage to the environment 
and to human health resulting in suffering and premature death (Henze et al., 2002). Pollution of 
groundwater and soil is a worldwide problem that can result in uptake and accumulation of toxic 
chemicals in food chains and harm the flora and fauna of affected habitats. Many activities are 
known to cause contamination of soil, surface water and groundwater, but in most cases, 
contamination is the results of careless use of chemicals, or is simply a consequence of discharge 
or ignorance. 
     The chemicals mixed with the water have bad impact on aquatic life because it uses Dissolved 
Oxygen (DO) for biodegradation. As DO drops, fish and other aquatic life are threatened and, in 
extreme case, killed. In addition, as dissolved oxygen levels fall, undesirable odors, tastes, and 
                                                        
1Assistant Professor, Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, SUST, Sylhet,Bangladesh.                    
msr.ceesust@gmail.com 
2Professor, Department Of Chemical Engineering and Polymer Science, SUST, Sylhet,Bangladesh. 
mislam@sust.edu 
3Lecturer,Department Of Chemical Engineering and Polymer Science, SUST, Sylhet, Bangladesh. 
saikat_cep@yahoo.com 
4Student (B.Sc Engg. Final year), Department Of Chemical Engineering and Polymer Science, SUST, 
Sylhet, Bangladesh. momin_cep@yahoo.com 
 822 
colors reduce the acceptability of water as a domestic supply and reduce its attractiveness for 
recreational uses. As a result, wastewater treatment is a burning issue in today’s world to 
minimize the effects of pollution. 
     Due to the poverty our country could not take immediate action or solution. The economical 
aspect of the industrialization was considered at first, not the social or environmental issues. This 
should not be continued.  We need both the industry and the safe environment. Before throwing, 
wastage must be treated to save our air and water of our environment. For evaluation and regulation 
of the process performance, oxygen uptake rate measurement is a useful tool. 
     Oxygen uptake measurements are commonly used to assess wastewater characteristics and to 
monitor the performance of wastewater treatment plants (Spanjers et al., 1995). Oxygen uptake 
rate measurements can provide much information concerning treatment plant performance, 
wastewater characteristics, degradability of special concentrated streams as well as parameters 
needed for mathematical models, in order to predict possible optimizations of a treatment plant. 
In addition it is useful for daily operation control. To extract broader information of the activated 
sludge, wastewater or the process performance, the OUR measurements are beneficially 
combined with supplementary methods and additional analysis (Ko et al., 2002).In activated 
sludge processes, the activity of the active biomass, to determine the response of the mixed liquor 
organisms to change in wastewater composition (Orupold et al., 1999). 
     Many procedures are described to measure the respiration system of active settled sludge in 
the literatures (Hagman and Jansen, 2007, Benes et al., 2002). After taking all the procedures in 
consideration, we have developed an active settled sludge respirator relatively more simplified, 
less costly and easy usability. 
 
 
2. Methodology 
 
2.1 Respiration 
 
The bacteria of the activated sludge are of two types. These are the chemoautotroph (mainly 
nitrifiers, which take in ammonia) and the heterotrophs (which consume the organic carbon of the 
BOD).  The ways in which they use oxygen is quite different.  The nitrifying bacteria, chiefly 
Nitrosamines and Nitrobacteria, oxidize ammonia to nitrate and then to nitrite.  The stages are: 
NH3 + O2                              NO2    +   O2 + energy                                   NO3 + energy (1) 
Nitrosamines                                                   Nitrobacteria 
This process is not strictly speaking, respiration.  True respiration is only displayed by the 
heterotrophic bacteria.  Respiration involves the breakdown of simple organic carbon molecules, 
and the end product is carbon dioxide and water. 
Organic substances + O2                                          CO2 + H2O + energy   (2) 
Heterotrophs 
However, the combined rates of oxygen uptake by the both types of bacteria, is usually referred 
to as the respiration rate of the activated sludge. What both processes have in common is that 
they yield energy. Some of this energy is used in keeping the bacteria alive. 
 
 
 823 
2.2 Growth 
The major use of the energy made available in respiration is for the biosynthetic chemical 
reactions involved in growth.  These require a supply of organic carbon molecules (and others 
such as nitrogen and phosphate containing molecules) in addition.  There is a proportional link 
between the carbon and energy, and if either is limiting, growth is restricted accordingly. 
Biomass + Energy                            New Biomass (growth)   (3) 
 
2.3 Biodegradation 
 
For both respiration and growth, the bacteria need to take in carbon and other nutrients. In 
nitrifies, the carbon is taken up as inorganic carbon dioxide, and organic carbon compounds are 
synthesized inside the bacteria.  Heterotrophs need to take in organic carbon compounds.  Small 
molecular weight compounds are taken in quickly.  These are the so-called readily biodegradable 
compounds of the sewage. Other larger molecules need to be broken down outside the bacteria 
into small compounds in order to be taken up.  This is a slow process, often taking many days to 
accomplish. These large and often complex molecules are the less readily biodegradable 
compounds.  The process of breakdown and uptake of these carbon compounds, (and of ammonia 
by nitrifiers), is biodegradation. Respiration rate is a predictor of biodegradation rate.  In 
heterotrophic bacteria, the carbon taken up is divided between that which is broken down in 
respiration and that which is built up into macromolecules for growth. 
 
2.4 Respirometry 
 
Respirometric method is the best way to assess the biodegradability of substances. Respirometry 
is a measurement and interpretation of the biological oxygen consumption rate (aerobic 
conditions) or biogas generation rate (anaerobic conditions) under well-defined experimental 
conditions. In general, the term respirometry is used to describe the measurement of oxygen 
consumption in wastewater samples or activated sludge. This oxygen consumption (respiration) 
comes from the microorganisms contained in the activated sludge as their survival phase 
(endogenous) and biological oxidation of the biodegradable materials (exogenous). Under aerobic 
conditions the micro-organisms consume oxygen in proportion to the organic matter and biomass 
in the sample. The respiration rate is the amount of oxygen per unit of volume and time [mg/l d] 
that is consumed by the micro-organisms. 
   Microorganisms present in the wastewater sample take headspace oxygen to degrade (oxidize) 
the organic substances in it. As oxygen is consumed to oxidize the organic substances, carbon 
dioxide (CO₂) is evolved by the following reaction: 
Organic substances + O₂                                             CO2 + H2O    (4) 
CO 2 is consumed by the KOH as follows: 
Microorganisms 
 824 
CO₂ + KOH                                    K₂CO3 + H2O         (5) 
As a result, headspace pressure change is indicated by manometric fluid movement which is 
actually caused by the headspace oxygen consumption. 
 
 
2.5 Calculation of OUR 
 
The aerobic degradation process of organic materials can be determined by measuring the oxygen 
uptake rate (OUR) for the microorganisms.  OUR is defined as oxygen per unit of volume and 
time that is consumed by the micro-organism in activated sludge and mathematically expressed 
as – 
OUR =     (for wastewater)   (6) 
 
Or, 
 
OUR = (for activated sludge)               (7) 
 
 
3. Construction 
 
3.1 Experimental setup 
 
The experimental setup is illustrated simply in Figure 1 in which the sludge respirometer consists 
of two (1 & 2) closed and air tied vessels, two small pans (3 & 4) filled with KOH, a U-shape 
scaled pipette connected with vessels by flexible rubber tube and a manometric fluid in the 
pipette. The whole system is ensured to be air tied. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 2 
3 4 
Figure 1 Simple diagram of active settled sludge respirometer 
 825 
3.2 Sample collection 
 
Three different types of samples are collected from three different sources. First one is collected 
from a big drain which is a major way of domestic waste discharge. Second one is collected from 
sewerage way of Sylhet Osmani Medical College as a medical waste. And the final one is 
collected from a bakery industry situated in Sylhet BCIC. 
 
 
4. Graphical representation 
 
Oxygen uptake (OU) behavior can be easily measured from the respirometric data within a short 
time using a little amount of sample. To measuring the value of OU; three respirometers were 
operated for five days to compare the results with BOD5 testing method. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2 Oxygen uptake vs time curve for the sample of medical wastewater 
 
There are some ups and downs observed in graphical representation of activated settle sludge. 
The scattered points are observed in the graphical appearance of experimental data. Some reasons 
are assumed to describe them. Active settled sludge can be compared with a heterogeneous 
system. Like a heterogeneous system, sludge contains both the aerobic and anaerobic system. 
Assume that both system run simultaneously. When the rate of anaerobic system is higher than 
aerobic system, then pressure rises in sample chamber and volume of manometric fluid decreases. 
There may be some organisms, consist of chlorophyll, produce unknown gases. Evolution of 
biogas may be another reason. However to achieve more sophisticated result, respirometer 
equipped with different types of dissolved oxygen (DO) sensors can be used. 
 
 826 
 
Figure 3 Oxygen uptake vs time curve for the sample of domestic wastewater 
 
 
Figure 4 Oxygen uptake vs time curve for the sample of industrial wastewater 
 
 
5. Conclusions 
 
The whole work was proved to be preferable for observing the oxygen uptake behavior of 
wastewater. The experiment revealed that the respirometric procedure has many benefits 
compared with the conventional BOD5 methods, in which, reduced sample preparation time, use 
of samples without dilution, easy and continuous reading of the measuring data, faster measuring 
time and less cost and error, very little chance for oxygen deficiency etc are noteworthy. 
 
 
 827 
Acknowledgements 
 
This study has been supported by the research funds of Shahjalal University of Science and 
Technology and Centre for Environmental Process Engineering, CEP, Sylhet, Bangladesh. M.S. 
Rahman acknowledges NSICT fellowship awarded by Ministry of Science and Information & 
Communication Technology, Government of Bangladesh. 
 
 
References 
 
Benes, O., Spanjers, H. and Holba,M. (2002).Respirometry techniques and activated sludge 
models. Wat. Sci. Tech., 46(4–5), 1–6. 
Hagman, M. and Jansen, J. L. C.(2007). Oxygen uptake rate measurements for application at 
wastewater treatment plants,VATTEN 63:131–138. 
Henze, M., Harremoës, P., Jansen, J. la C. and Arvin, E.(2002). Wastewater treatment –
Biological and chemical processes.Third Edition. Springer Verlag. Berlin Heidel­ berg. ISBN: 
3­540­42228­5. 
Ko, J., Woo, H., Copp, B. J., Kim, S. and Kim. (2002). Evaluation of several respirometrybased 
activated sludge toxicity control strategies. Wat. Sci. Tech., 45(4–5), 143–150. 
Orupold, K., Hellat, K. And Tenno, T. (1999). Estimation of treatability of different industrial 
wastewaters by activated sludge oxygen uptake rate measurements. Wat. Sci. Tech., 40(1), 31–
36. 
Spanjers, H. and Vanrolleghem, P.(1995).Respirometry as a tool for rapid characterization of 
wastewater and activated sludge.Wat. Sci. Tech., 31(2), 105–114. 
 
  
828 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
VULNERABILITY AND ADAPTATION PRACTICES IN THE SETTLEMENT 
PATTERN: A CASE OF WATER LOGGED VILLAGE IN KESHABPUR UPAZILA 
 
 
Saimum Kabir1 
 
 
ABSTRACT: In the milieu of climate change, adaptation is often considered as the most viable 
and manageable responses to contend with, especially for the developing country like 
Bangladesh. Historically human settlement in this delta has been evolved to adapt with the geo-
physical and hydro-morphological characteristics of the landscape. In hazard prone areas the 
process of adaptation in settlement is dynamic and hazard specific but often failed to 
persist/comply with when the hazard turns into disaster. More over the impending threats of 
climate change and sea level rise in near future, as expected, will further intensify the severity 
and extent of the hazard which in turn will cause a mass exodus of population. To cope with such 
anticipated geo-climatic vulnerability a holistic approach of adaptation in the settlement design is 
needed. Adaptation in agriculture is already in progress which in fact widens the opportunity for 
socio-spatial adaptation in vulnerable area. The study aims, therefore, to identify the local 
practices for socio-spatial adaptation in hazard prone areas and possibility to adopt those in the 
anticipated future context. The study investigates the structural (physical) and non structural 
(social) measures of adaptations taken by the local community and public agencies in water 
logged areas of Keshabpur upazila located in the southwest region of Bangladesh. A village 
named Maynapur is selected from the most vulnerable zone of the upazila for micro level 
analysis of settlement pattern. Primary data about the settlement features and adaptation measures 
are collected from field survey and focus group discussion conducted between the years 2010-11. 
It is observed that both public agencies and local communities have exerted effort to alleviate the 
impact of water logging. The autonomous and planned measures taken by the villagers and public 
agencies often lead to a change in the indigenous pattern of the settlement.  
 
Keywords: Climate change, settlement pattern, adaptation, water logging, geo-climatic 
vulnerability, hazard prone area, built environment  
 
1.   Introduction  
 
Study on human settlement is an omni discussed issue and generally has been the subject matter 
of planning, environmental and social sciences such as anthropology, geography, sociology, 
ecology etc. Predicted climate change scenario adds new dimensions in the settlement research 
                                                        
1 Lecturer, Department of Architecture, American International University-Bangladesh (AIUB), Banani, 
Dhaka, Bangladesh, saimum@aiub.edu. 
  
829 
 
and is becoming a research interest in the field of disaster management, development studies, and 
urban design and even in architecture to examine the scope and possibilities of existing 
development to adapt with. There are, however, substantial published and on going research 
works focusing on vulnerability and adaptation on agro-ecological, geo-hydrological and socio-
economic sectors but very limited studies have been conducted on form and pattern of climate 
resilience human settlement. The few works that give some light in the issue are primarily 
confined to analysis of spatial vulnerability at macro level (regional) or documentation of 
indigenous coping practice at household level under present context. Moreover, existing study 
often failed to infer the future of human settlement in the area exposed to the risk of inundation 
due to sea level rise and other climate change related impact.Since most of coastal plains are 
within 3 to 5 meters from the mean sea level, it was previously thought that a significant part of 
the coastal areas (as high as 18 % of the country) would be completely inundated by rising sea 
waters. Such a speculation was made based on two major approximations: (a) the coastal plains 
are not protected and (b) the seawater front will follow the contour line of land elevation. In 
reality, however, it is found that most of the southwestern and central coastal plains are polder 
area and confined by embankment. This polder area is subjected to drainage congestion and 
prone to water logging. The existing measures of protection if not further improve will exacerbate 
the situation and cause severe water logging in the region if sea level rise as predicted rate (IWM 
and CEGIS, 2007). Due to the backwater effect, embankments may be overtopped and areas 
flooded. This phenomenon would become a serious problem for the country and poses threats to 
lives, activities, settlements, structures and ecological character of the affected area. Adaptation 
in human settlement is at present the prime need of Bangladesh due to the fact that a large portion 
of the country’s population is exposed to the risk of inundation and it is not possible to retreat the 
entire affected population considering the high population density of the country. Adaptation 
measure in agriculture is already in progress which in fact widens the opportunity for settlement 
adaptation in coastal area of Bangladesh. Structural and non structural measures of copping 
practiced by the local community to reduce vulnerability of their built environment to existing 
water related hazards can also serve as means of adapting to anticipated climate change. Hence 
the autonomous measures of adaption taken by the indigenous people can be institutionalized for 
sustainable development of coastal settlement. Based on this hypothesis, the present study was 
undertaken in Keshabpur Upazila of Jessore district due to its high vulnerability to water logging.   
 
2. Geo-climatic Vulnerability of Study Area 
Water logging is the most pressing problem in southwest region of Bangladesh. Origin of the 
problem begins in early ‘80s, when severe water logging had resulted in many parts of the area. 
The region is a tidal wetland and prior to construction of permanent embankment the area used to 
be flooded by high tide twice in a day in harmony with lunar cycle. But after construction of 
embankment the area compartmentalized into polders and sedimentation only took place in river 
channels, causing very rapid deposition on the river channels. This process ultimately raised the 
riverbeds in comparison to adjacent beels or wetlands subsided and gradually over 106,000 
thousands hectors of land became permanently waterlogged (Islam, S. and Kibria, Z., 2006). 
Almost 8 months in a year most of the areas in the region remain inundated (Adri, N. and Islam, 
I., 2010). During this period normal life of the inhabitants greatly interrupted as the homesteads 
with their farmland, roads and infrastructure immerse under stagnant water.  
  
830 
 
      Again sea level rise will exacerbate water logging problem in the area (IWM, 2005).  For 62 
cm of sea level rise about 32% more area of these polders will be deeply inundated due to 
overtopping of the polder [IWM and CEGIS, 2007] as the existing flood control infrastructure 
was designed for historical water levels and tidal fluctuation. This will lead to more saline water 
intrusion in the area detrimental to aquatic and terrestrial environment.  
SLR, 0 cm : U/S flow 2000 as predicted by IWM
FLOOD FREE
0-0.15 m
0.15-0.30 m
0.30-0.60 m
0.60-0.90 m
0.90-1.80 m
1.80-3.60 cm
Above 3.60
HARIHAR RIVER
KOBADAK RIVER
BHA
DRA
BH
AD
RA
 R
IV
ER
 RIVER
SLR, 14 cm : U/S flow 2000 as predicted by IWM
FLOOD FREE
0-0.15 m
0.15-0.30m
0.30-0.60m
0.60-0.90 m
0.90-1.80 m
1.80-3.60 m
Above 3.60
HARIHAR RIVER
KOBADAK RIVER
BHA
DRA
BH
AD
RA
 R
IV
ER
 RIVER
 
SLR, 32 cm : U/S flow 2000 as predicted by IWM
FLOOD FREE
0-0.15 m
0.15-0.30 m
0.30-0.60 m
0.60-0.90 m
0.90-1.80 m
1.80-3.60 m
Above 3.60
HARIHAR RIVER
KOBADAK RIVER
BHA
DRA
B
H
A
D
R
A R
IV
ER
 RIVER
SLR, 88 cm : U/S flow 2000 as predicted by IWM
FLOOD FREE
0-0.15 m
0.15-0.30 m
0.30-0.60 m
0.60-0.90 m
0.90-1.80 m
1.80-3.60 m
Above 3.60
HARIHAR RIVER
KOBADAK RIVER
BHA
DRA
B
HA
D
RA
 R
IV
ER
 RIVER
 
Figure 1 Impact of sea level rise in Keshabpur upazila (adopted from: IWM, 2005) 
 
3. Impacts of Water Logging 
The water logging has brought extreme suffering to the local communities in the region. Many 
villages remain inundated and communication system has collapsed, surface as well as inland 
water transport. Many people moved onto embankments and roadside. Educational institutions 
have been severely damaged and children have been forced to discontinue education. In the On 
the other hand, biodiversity and livestock have been greatly decreased. Salinity has increased due 
to capillary action and vast areas of agricultural land lost soil fertility. Firewood and pure 
drinking water have become scarce. Waterborne diseases like diarrhea and scabies have become 
  
831 
 
endemic. Moreover, unemployment has forced many people to migrate to urban areas in search 
of livelihood (EGIS, 1998; Islam, S. and Kibria, Z. ,2006). 
    Poor households experience many other forms of vulnerability due to water logging condition. 
Poor people’s houses are naturally poorly built, which rot during prolonged water logging. 
Inundated roads and other physical infrastructures are severely damaged in water logged 
conditions. Biomass based walls and earthen walls are completely destroyed even in one water 
logging event and the family members easily become homeless. Poor and marginal people find it 
difficult economically to reconstruct their houses, fully knowing that their efforts will again be 
destroyed in the next water logging period. In permanent water logging condition, most of the 
latrines are found to be destroyed by standing water. The poor are forced to defecate in open 
water that surrounds them (CCC, 2009). For the heavy pour of September and November in 
2005, around 3430 hectares of cultivable land of 74 villages of Keshabpur Upazila under Jessore 
District went under water. 1,36,100 people of 27,240 families became waterlogged. 80% houses 
of the affected areas, roads and village paths, educational institutes, clinic and hospitals, religious 
institutes are under water (CDP, 2006 and PPS, 2006).  
 
Table 1 Description of loses, Keshabpur 
 
Affected area  2004 2005 
Village  98 74  
House damage  6792 4565  
Family / house hold 21,430 27,240  
People   136100 
Cultivable land 26573 hectares 3430 hectares  
Village path 
(unpaved)  
- 55 km  
Metal road  - 6 km  
Educational inst  - 24  
Source: (CDP, 2006 and PPS, 2006, Uttran, 200 
4. Objectives and Scope of the Study  
The study focuses on vulnerability of settlement in water logging condition and what are the 
structural and non structural measures taken by the households and public agencies to cope with 
and thereby identify the indigenous and institutional measures of socio-spatial adaptation and 
how it changes the settlement pattern of the vulnerable area. Once identify, the findings may be 
applied to develop recommendation for sustainable settlement planning in vulnerable coastal area 
in response to present and anticipated geo-climatic vulnerability. The scope of the study is limited 
to exploration of physical change in settlement pattern as observed in selected study area and 
formulation of inventory of indigenous and institutional practices of socio-spatial adaptation to 
cope with the vulnerability of the context.  
 
5. The Study Area and Methodology 
 
The vulnerability of settlement is measured on the scale of nature and severity of the event or 
issue as well as the physical and socio-economic factors that determine the degree of settlement 
  
832 
 
resilience; how they are affected and the capacity of settlement component or community to 
recover [Pelling, M., 2003] i.e. adaptation mechanism of settlements and people determines the 
vulnerability level. To understand how the local people are adapting with the situation a village 
named Maynapur is selected from the most vulnerable zone for micro level analysis. The  village 
is situated in the eastern boundary of Safulkati union of Keshabpur upazila along the border 
region of Jessore and Khulna Zila. The contextual setting has made the study area unique 
compare to other vulnerable village in the union. The village is located within the wetland basin 
of Beel Khuksia. Before any institutional intervention the area was used to characterize as fallow 
land which was flooded by high tide in harmony with the lunar cycle. To cope with the situation 
local people used to construct temporary earthen embankments (ostomashi bandh) in dry season 
around the areas to protect the arable land from saline water intrusion and exchanged saline water 
of their fields with river water in the rainy season (Islam, S. and Kibria, Z., 2006). This season 
responsive indigenous technique of water resource management raises the land by sediment 
deposition and minimizes the salinity without interrupting the natural flow of the tidal river. After 
implementation of KJDRP (Khulna-Jessore Drainage Rehabilitation Project) the area become 
water logged due to sedimentation of river bed. As a measure of adaptation TRM (Tidal River 
Management) project was implemented and total 1149 acre of Beel khuksia and part of Arua has 
converted into a tidal basin (ADB, 2007).  
                                                                                                                          
 
PANJIA
KUMARGHATA
SARUTIA
NARAYANPUR
KALICHARANPUR
ARUA
SANTALA
DAHARI
KAKBANDHAL
SUFALAKATI
KRISHNAGAR
SARUTIA
KAEMKHOLA
KANAIDANGA
GIRIDHARNAGAR
MAYNAPUR
KISMAT SANTALA
HARIAGHOP
KALAGACHHI
BEEL KHUKSIA
PACCA ROAD
KATCHA ROAD
MAUZA BOUNDARY
LEGEND
G RO WTH CENTER  
Figure 2   Maynapur village and adjacent Beel Khuksia 
 
This particular measure of protection has significant impact on the adjacent settlements and 
village like Maynapur has undergone a morphological transformation. Primary data about the 
settlement features and adaptation measures are collected from field survey and focus group 
  
833 
 
discussion conducted between the years 2010-11.To identify the physical change in settlement 
pattern, historical satellite images of the village are analyzed in terms of spatial aspects: 
settlement pattern, homestead layout, housing characteristics, vegetation practices and social 
aspects of the household: family size, occupation and behavioral response. 
6. Socio-spatial Profile of the Waterlogged Village Maynapur 
The study area Maynapur is a small village where 100% household is Hindu in religion with 
current population of 495 (according to Union Parishad Statistics, 2011) covering an area of 97 
acre. According to the population census of 1981 the village had 50 households with population 
of 253. A negative growth in population is observed in next 10 years and the number was reduced 
to 40 in household and 181 in total population (BBS,1991). Peoples were forced to migrate due to 
adverse environmental impact of the polder causing drainage congestion and severe water 
logging from the beginning of early 90’s. However, situation was relatively improved in next 
decades by the government and local initiatives. Khulna-Jessore drainage rehabilitation project 
was initiated and implemented during this period. According to the last population census 
population of Maynapur was raised to 271 (72 households) by the year 2001 (BBS, 2001).  
       
 
             
Figure 3   Maynapur , before TRM (left) and  after implementation of TRM project 
 
Spatially the village is bounded by Beel Khuksia in its three sides and reached by a muddy / 
katcha road after walking 1.75 km from the nearest pacca road. Because of its relatively high 
level, this road is often the only one not to be submerged during the annual monsoon but is 
subjected to erosion due to prolong water logging. Land communication is often disrupted during 
heavy monsoon and boat is the only means of communication then. Nearest neighborhood 
villages are Santala and Kismat santla, 1.22 km and 1.01 km away respectively (measured from 
the geometric center of the village). A primary school is located at the far end of the Maynapur 
nion map 
  
834 
 
village. This is the only institution for primary education of the children within these localities. 
The school building is one storied pacca structure which remains submerge under 2 to 3 feet 
water during the whole period of monsoon. The open space infront of the school, the only play 
area or community gathering place in the village, is also inundated during this period. Settlement 
of Maynapur is linear in pattern where homesteads are clustered along the village path or 
communication spine.  
 
      
Primary School
01
02
03
0 4
05 06
07
08
09
11
12
13
15
1 4
16
17
18
1 9
2 0
21
22
2 3
24
25
26
2 7
28
29
30
3 1
3 2
33
3 4
35
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
3 8
4 0
45
4 4
43
4 2
41
37
36
T
k it
10
T
T
T
T
39
46
0 25' 50' 100'
NORTH
SETTLEMENT PATTERN OF MAYNAPUR VILLAGE
DAKHSIN PARA
BEEL BARIA
MADHA PARA
UTTAR PARA
HOUSE OF THE LANDLORD
PRIMARY SCHOOL
TEMPLE
EMBANKMENT CUM ROAD
WATER LOGGED AREA
DWELLING UNIT
POND / SHRIMP CULTURE
T TOILET
TUBEWELL
DEEP TUBEWELL
DEEP TUBEWELL
 
 
 
Figure 4  Settlement feature of Maynapur village: a. spatial layout of the village, b. Primary 
school, c. Beel baria , d.waterlogged area inside the embankment d. Pathway to village in 
dilapidated condition  e. house of the landlord: only 2storied structure in the village. 
 
This path way cum embankment runs along the periphery of the village defining the edge 
between the beel area and homestead area. Most of the homesteads are concentrated inside the 
embankment and grouped into three paras or neighborhoods namely Dakhsin para, Madha para 
and Uttar para.  The remaining few are scattered or dispersed outside the embankment within the 
beel area locally known as ‘Beel bari’. Each para is spatially separated by wetlands or 
waterlogged area and sharing a deep tubewell. 
  
835 
 
    The house of the landlord is located in the Dakhsin para and other homesteads are organized 
around it. This area is the earliest part of settlement containing 18 homesteads at present. 
Morphologically this para displays a distinct characteristic of its own. The para is elliptical in 
shape surrounded by orchard garden. A village lane branches off perpendicular to the primary 
road and lead into the para towards the house of the landlord; the only two storied structure in the 
village. There is no definite pathway for others but can be accessed through the setbacks between 
two homesteads. The other paras inside the embankment do not show a definite pattern in 
organization and are clustered close to the primary road / embankment on relatively high land. In 
almost every rainy season Dakhsin para is inundated under 3 feet water. Inundation depth of 
Madha para and Uttar para is vary from 2 to 1 feet. Homesteads in Beel baria, indeed, are most 
exposed to the risk of inundation and are clustered on raised mound (bhiti) like an island. Even in 
dry season communication to beel baria is cumbersome as the household has to cross a bamboo 
bridge to reach their homestead. In a homestead individual houses are organized around a 
courtyard or angina independently or in common (see table: 02). Completely enclosed courtyard 
is not evident in the village. Number of independent building blocks are arranged to form a court. 
However, the size and number of building unit in a homestead varies in accordance with the 
economic condition of the household. The main dwelling, which is the sleeping unit, is of 
primary importance in a homestead and modeled to resist the adverse impact the environment. 
Most of the main blocks are raised on a high plinth to avoid inundation and tend to be more 
permanent. The ancillary structures such as kitchen, cowsheds (Goalghar), storage of fire wood 
etc. tend to be semi-permanent and are constructed of perishable materials. Granary or crop 
storage is also observed in several homesteads at Dakhsin para and few at Uttar para. These are 
constructed on stilts or raised platform above the flood level.  Affluent households have sanitary 
latrine located behind or at the corner of the homestead away from main block. Poor villagers 
have temporary arrangement or unhygienic state of toilet facility.  
 
Table 2 Type of courtyard (angina) observed in Maynapur village 
 
The structure and layout of the homesteads are not uniform, although certain systems of 
organization can be observed. The dwellings of five socio-economic groups were studied; 
  
836 
 
however, according to systems of organization, the dwellings can be categorized in three main 
groups - homesteads of the landless, the farmers and the landlords (see table: 03)  
Table 3 Homestead layout of Maynapur village  
 
 
L = Living block; K= Kitchen; CS= Cowshed; S= Storage 
Morphologically the courtyard is the heart of the rural homestead where most domestic activities 
take place.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 5 (a) In dry period: Activity in courtyard (b) In monsoon period: Water logging hinders 
day to day activity of the villagers 
 
a
_  
b
_  
  
837 
 
Culturally the courtyard is female dominating space and activities like drying of cloth or 
firewood, drying and repairing of fishing net, fetching water from the tubewell , outdoor cooking 
, gossiping etc are observed during field survey in dry season. Few household have small 
mandapa for religious worship in their courtyard. The life of the household is greatly disrupted by 
the water logging phenomenon as the courtyard is inundated. This restricts household mobility 
and daily activity pattern. The sufferings become more intense as in typical layout the cooking 
area and latrine are located distance away from the dwelling unit. The household need to cross 
the waterlogged courtyard as necessity and often suffer from waterborne diseases like diarrhea, 
dysentery and skin diseases. 
     In plan, the main house within the homestead is generally rectangular in shape and mostly 
single-storied, except the house of the village chief. In most cases the main block consists of a 
single room with or without veranda in front. In newly built house, often more than one room is 
observed. Except few, most of the main houses/ sleeping units are oriented facing north-south to 
take advantage of the prevailing wind direction to relieve humidity and the ancillary structures 
added subsequently to form a courtyard. Factors like scarcity of dry land, location of immediate 
homestead, privacy and social relationship with the adjacent neighbor play vital role in the 
orientation of few others.  Based on building material, housing structure of Maynapur can be 
categorized into following groups:  
 
Table 2 Type of housing structure as observed in Maynapur village 
Construction material Category 
Roof Wall Plinth 
Type A pacca / Permanent 
house  
Reinforced 
concrete  
Brick  Brick with cement finish  
Type B1 CI sheet  Brick  Brick with cement finish 
Type B2 
semi pacca / Semi 
permanent house  CI sheet  Brick  Compacted earth floor 
with brick lining  
Type C1 CI sheet  Mud  Mud  
Type C2 Clay tile  Mud  Mud  
Type C3 Clay tile  Mud with bamboo 
mat / date leaf 
Mud  
Type C4 Clay tile  Bamboo mat  Mud  
Type C5 
katcha / bio-mass 
house  
CI sheet Bamboo mat  Mud  
Type  D1 Thatch  Bamboo mat  Mud  
Type  D2 
Jhupri house / 
temporary Thatch  Thatch  Mud  
 
       Pacca/ Permanent House (type A):  House of this type is constructed with load bearing brick 
wall supporting the RCC roof. The floor is of cement finish and doors and windows are of wood. 
Only the house of the village chieftain is of this type. These materials are in a sense flood proof 
and can withstand flood water for a long period (Hafiz, R., 2000). Stagnant flood water, however, 
damages paint and finishes, wooden doors and windows.  
       Semi pacca/ Semi permanent house (Type B1/ type B2): In this type, houses are constructed 
load bearing brick walls supporting a sloping CI sheet roof. The plinth is either cement finish or 
compacted earth floor with brick lining. Two different systems of roofing are observed; Dochala 
or gable roof and Chochala or hipped roof. For economy of construction, the roof of the main 
  
838 
 
house is either Chochala or dochala type but the roof of ancillary structure is always dochala 
type. A wooden truss supports the roof, with doors and windows of wood. The houses of the 
affluent villagers belong to this type. Inundation causes damage to doors, window and wall 
finishes while the damage to plinth is low. Stagnant water may cause dampness to the mud plinth.  
       Katcha/ bio-mass house (Type C1/ type C2 / type C3 / type C4/ type C5): In this type walls 
are mainly constructed of mud and/or bamboo mat with CI sheet or Clay tile roof. Clay tile is a 
local building material of the region and traditionally used to construct the roof of the house. The 
plinth is of simply compacted mud. Doors and windows are of wood. Water logging may cause 
structural damage to the mud plinth and bio-mass wall. 
      Jhupri / temporary house (Type D1/ type D2): This is the most vulnerable type. This type of 
house is constructed of bamboo post, split bamboo mating walls or thatch wall and thatch roof 
with a polythene underlining for protection against rain water. A bamboo truss supports the 
thatch roof. The floor is of compacted earth or simply covered with loose brick.  In Maynapur, 
these materials are only seen to be used in constructing ancillary structure like kitchen or 
cowshed. Stagnant water causes damage to the whole structure.  
 
7. Social Adaptation to Water Logging  
 
Water logging phenomenon restricts the natural growth of the population in Maynapur. Compare 
to other upland village in the union the population growth in the waterlogged village is low. For 
instance, in an upland village Kalagachi no of household has increased twice in last 20 years 
(from 1881-2001) where as the population has grown approx. 1.5 times in Maynapur village for 
same time period. The data’s of average family size also supports the similar trend as shown in 
the following table- 
Table 4 Comparison of population growth between upland and water logged village 
 Village 
name  
No of  HH 
( 1981) 
No of  HH 
( 2001) 
Total Pop. 
(2001) 
Avg family 
size (2001) 
Water logged village  Maynapur  50 72 271 3.76 
Upland village  Kalagachi  85 153 798 5.21 
Source: Bangladesh population census, 2001                                         HH = household, Pop. = population 
There has been a significant change in the occupational pattern in the study area. The area was 
once well known as a “store house of paddy”. A crop storage or Gola in the homestead is still 
evident in old part of the settlement.  The survey identify that 94 % of households had agriculture 
as their principle occupation (BBS, 1981) before water logging became acute. But now, it is 
found only 10 % of the household heads in the study area identify agriculture as the principle 
occupation. Most of the households adopt fishing as secondary occupation in the study village. 
The villagers reported that, adjacent Beel Khuksia was an abundant natural source of fishes and 
the villagers were benefited initially after implementation of TRM. But as long term impact, 
TRM cause permanent inundation of seasonal agriculture land which made the household 
dependent on a single source for their income. This eventually has created extra pressure on the 
source results scarcity of fish and led the poor villagers to adopt a new occupation for survival. In 
  
839 
 
last few years, as it is observed, the percentage of agriculture/day laborer increases at 
considerable rate in the study area.  
      Water logging has severely affected indigenous sources of fuel in Maynapur village. Due to 
prolong water logging and salinity problem in the village, plants and trees are dying out. Few that 
are able to survive are in very poor health with low dense foliage. Villagers depend on 
outsourcing for their fire wood. It is observed that, most of the villagers use cow dung as fuel . 
But the supply of cow dung is affected as the number of cows and bullocks has declined. It is 
reported that, dried peat soil is used as fuel in peat basin area like Beel dakatia during water 
logged period (Rahman, A, 1995).  
 
8. Spatial Adaptation (Adaptation in Settlement) to Water Logging 
 
Historically the village Maynapur was linear in pattern and ‘amorphous’ in shape where the 
dwelling units were compacted along the primary circulation spine or the village path. The spatial 
composition of the settlement pattern was evolved historically to cope better with the physical 
and hydro-morphological characteristics of the landscape rather than of cultural. Geographically 
the village is located in tidal basin area where the low land was flooded twice in a day with lunar 
cycle during pre-polder period. Homestead, in response, was constructed on relatively high 
ground to protect it from flooding. This of course limited the growth of the settlement and 
concentrated it along the transportation network [see fig 7(a)]. After construction of polder, the 
huge chunk of fallow land in tidal basin area became free of tidal flooding and used for 
agricultural purpose. This in return brought green revolution to agricultural production and thus 
socio-economic condition of the villagers. Besides the new landscape allow the settlement to 
grow beyond its topographic boundary [see fig 7(b)]. A tendency of linear growth in the 
settlement along the north south direction is observed in this period and was prevalent till the 
construction of TRM. Morphologically the village had no definite edge or physical boundary then 
but the extent of homestead area was limited to Dakhsin para in the south and Uttar para in the 
north and Beel bari in the west. The village was then only exposed to seasonal flood due to heavy 
pour in the monsoon or overtopping of the Hari River embankment in case of depression in the 
sea.  The problem became more severe as the river bed was silted up with course of time by 
sediment deposition. This created drainage congestion in the area and the village Maynapur 
became waterlogged for almost eight months a year.   
      Both public agencies and local communities have exerted effort to alleviate impact of water 
logging.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) (b) (c) 
Figure 6 Transformation of spatial pattern of Maynapur village 
  
840 
 
It is observed more than one strategies have applied or practiced since each strategy has its own 
function. The course of actions taken by the villagers and public agencies following these 
strategies often leads to a change to the indigenous pattern of the settlement. The structural 
measures taken by the local community and public agencies to adapt with water logging are 
discussed under following three strategies as mention by Mclean (2001) and Nicholl (2003). 
8.1 Adaptation by protection 
 
To protect the human settlement from inundation, as a measure of planned adaptation, TRM or 
Tidal River Management project was implemented by the year 2006 (initiated in 2002) in 4000 
hector of Beel khuksia and adjoining low land by the Water Development Board under the master 
plan of KJDRP and is planned for three other tidal basins in Beel buruli, Pathra and Panjia 
(ADB, 2007). The idea of TRM is simple: to allow tidal flow into wetland basin, locally known 
as Jowar bhata khelano and releasing tidal flow back to the river. As a result of this process, 
sediments carried by tidal flow deposits on the wetland basin instead of riverbed. It required 
construction of embankment around the project area. 
0
300
600
900
1200
1500
1800
2100
2400
2700
300 600 900 1200 1500 1800 2100 2400 2700
MOYNAPUR _2001_Before TRM
LENGTH OF LONG AXIS  = 2300' ( DISTANCE BETWEEN TWO FARTHEST POINT(HOMESTEAD) ALONG LONGITUDINAL AXIS)
LENGTH OF SHORT AXIS = 595'  ( DISTANCE BETWEEN TWO FARTHEST POINT(HOMESTEAD) ALONG TRANSVERSE AXIS)
LENGTH/ WIDTH RATIO = 2300595
 = 3.86
0 1
0 2
0 3
0 4
0 5 0 6
0 7
0 8
0 9
1
1 2
13
15
1 4
1 6
1 7
1 8
1 9
20
2 1
2 2
2 3
24
2 5
26
27
28
29
30
3 1
3 2
3
34
3 5
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
3 8
4 0
4 5
4 4
4 3
4 2
4 1
3 7
3 6
T
k it
1 0
3 9
4 6
0
300
600
900
1200
1500
1800
2100
2400
2700
300 600 900 1200 1500 1800 2100 2400 2700
4 7
4 8
4 9
50
5 1
52
5 3
54
5
56
57
5 8
5 960
61
6 2
6 3
6 4
65
6 6
6 8
6 9
7 0
7 1
MOYNAPUR _2011_After TRM
 
Figure 7 Analysis of settlement shape compactness for Maynapur village for pre and post period 
of institutional adaption by protection. 
[The compactness of the shape of the village is measured through the ratio of length and breath (L/B), 
which is: LB= length of long axis of cell / length of short axis of cell ; where the long axis is the line 
joining the two points in the boundary which are furthest from each other in a straight line, and the short 
axis is the largest line that can be drawn perpendicular to the long axis between two other points in the 
boundary (Hammond, R. and McCullagh, P., 1974).] 
  
841 
 
In the process the existing road of the Maynapur village is converted to road cum embankment 
creating an enclosure. The modification has significant impact on the settlement pattern of the 
Maynapur village. The original amorphous shape (compactness value 3.86) of the village now 
transformed into a more compact recto- linear shape (compactness value 1.84) bounded by the 
embankment (fig 08). Spatially the village now divided into two discrete segments: settlement 
inside the embankment and settlement outside the embankment. 
8.2 Adaptation by accommodation 
8.2.1. Structural modification of the house  
8.2.1.1. Adoption of permanent building material 
 To cope with water logging situation an increasing trend of constructing the house with more 
permanent building material is observed. This change, however, doesn’t solely indicate that this 
is happening in the process of adaptation to water logging as the housing pattern may change due 
to socio-economic up gradation of a society.  
      In this process of structural adaptation from temporary to permanent kitchen is the second 
priority for the villagers after main housing unit. It is also observed affected households equally 
prioritize to save their livestock and build the plinth and wall of the cowshed with more 
permanent material. Toilet comes next in the hierarchy. Of the 54 households in the village it is 
observed that 63.46% of main dwelling unit is pacca or semipacca in nature. Kitchen and 
cowshed appears next 24.32% and 22.22% respectively.  With the recent initiatives of GO and 
NGOs under rural health and sanitation program, almost 75% households in the village have 
access to fixed place latrine of any type. Of them 18% households have pacca and sanitary 
latrine. Rest of the households have ring slab latrine of katcha and open type (temporary 
arrangement where the enclosure is low height and made of polythene or thatch).   
   
   
 
Figure 8 Structural adaptation priorities for different house form 
 
It is common practice among the villagers to adopt permanent material for vulnerable 
components of the houses first. As water logging may cause substantial damage to the mud plinth 
the priority is given to strengthen and maintenance of the plinth than the wall or roof of the 
structure. Almost 69% households in the village remodel the plinth with permanent material. Of 
them 100% household in Beel baria (most vulnerable part of the settlement) and 99% in Madha 
para (comparatively newly settled part of the settlement) adopt permanent material to construct 
  
842 
 
their plinth. Although the avg. socio economic condition of the household of this part is relatively 
lower then the other part of the settlement.  
 
  
 
 
Figure 9 Contruction of plinth with compct earth with brick lining is a popular practice in 
Maynapur 
It is observed that, to reduce the erosion of the plinth, the villagers used to lining the mud plinth 
with brick either exposed or with cement finishes and thus protect the compact earth inside from 
direct contact with the water. This method of plinth construction is more economic which widely 
used in the flood prone region of Bangladesh and proves effective against the inundation. Apart 
from the 36% houses with pacca plinth almost 31% of total household adopted this semi 
permanent measure to strengthen the plinth. 
 
8.2.1.2. Raising the plinth level:  
 
Besides using more permanent material for plinth construction, adjustment of the plinth height is 
another local response to adapt with water logging situation. Traditionally, people in this region 
used to build their house on raised mud plinth. House on stilts is not customary in the region. The 
affected household raised the plinth level of the main house above the average local flood level to 
avoid inundation of the sleeping unit. The houses that are constructed or reconstructed lately have 
plinth height of nearly 3 feet. However the old structures, specially the pacca houses, have 
limited option to alter the plinth height. Household of this type raise their furniture on bricks and 
store their valuable documents and foods on a ceiling mounted wooden plank locally known as 
Darma; a temporary measure to keep it dry and protect it from damage by water. Household 
having mud plinth house reported that they had changed their plinth height after the devastating 
flood of 2006 to adjust with the maximum inundation level. 
 
Table 05:  A comparative statistics of plinth height in relation to inundation level 
 
 Para  Max plinth 
height  
Min plinth 
height  
Avg plinth 
height  
Avg. inundation 
level 
Topography of 
Homestead site 
Dakhsin 
para 
3 feet 1.5 feet  2.5 feet  1.5’- 2.5’   Relatively low land  
Beel baria  2.5 feet 1 feet 2 feet 1’-1.5’   Raised mound 
1. Earth infill 
2. Brick lining  
3. Cement plaster finish 
1 
2 
3 
 
  
843 
 
Madha 
para  
3 feet  1.5 feet  2 feet  1’-2’   Moderately low land  
Uttar para  2.5  1 feet  1.5 feet  0-1’   relatively high land  
Only the plinth of main house is considered ( sample village Maynapur ) 
Table 06:  A comparative statistics of plinth height of different structure in Maynapur village 
 
% of structure with respect to plinth height Type of structure 
3 feet 2.5 feet 2feet 1.5 feet 1 feet > 1feet 
Main house 15.38% 21.15% 26.92% 15.38% 15.38% 5.77% 
Kitchen 2.22% 2.22% 26.67% 28.89% 28.89% 11.11% 
Cowshed - - 5.26% 23.68% 55.26% 15.79% 
Toilet 5.88% - 8.82% 11.76% 32.35% 41.18% 
Others - - 50% 25% 25% - 
     
Apart from the above measure, a structure with elevated platform made by bamboo/ wooden 
section locally known as Machan is used to store the fire wood or other source of domestic fuel 
(fig 11). 
 
 
 
Figure 10 Household raised the bhiti or plinth of the main house in response to inundation. 
Figure 11 Machan or elevated platform to store the raw material of domestic fuel. 
 
In addition to that few planned measures were taken by the public agencies at community level to 
ensure sanitation and fresh water supply during inundation period. As a part of ‘Rural Health and 
Sanitation Program’, PWD of Bangladesh government set up two pacca sanitary latrines and a 
deep tube well on raised plinth or elevated platform (fig 12 & 13). The average plinth height of 
this establishment is 3 feet. Two latrines are located at two far end of the village, one at Dakhsin 
para and other at Uttar para. People reported that, these latrines were shared by the communities 
especially by the women during acute water logging period. Fresh water supply is ensured by two 
deep tubewells located at strategic location of the community and raised on a platform above the 
maximum inundation level. 
 
  
844 
 
   
 
Figure 12 a & b: Sanitary toilet at holding no 2 & 44 of Maynapur village, provided by PWD. 
Figure 13 Deep tubewell on a raised platform located at the center of the village. 
8.2.2. Compact arrangement of homestead structures 
By origin homestead pattern of Maynapur can be characterized as loosely built structure 
organized around a courtyard where communication from one structure to other is done through 
courtyard. Water logging creates disruption to this indigenous pattern of living. As an 
autonomous response of the household a compact layout of the homestead is observed in the 
village. Table 6 shows that, a significant ratio (54.4%) of the household adopted L- shape layout 
with additional 18.3% of more compact layout of linear and single block type.  
Table 06:  Compactness value of homestead structures in Maynapur village 
 
Calculated by author  
[Measurement of compactness of shape is the ratio of area and perimeter of the shape and can be obtained 
by, Sc = 4πA/ P2; here Sc = shape compactness, A = area of the shape and P = perimeter of the shape. Most 
compact shape according to this index is a Circle which has an index of 1.00, then the Square with index of 
0.78. (Adopted from Ebdon, 1985 and modified by author)] 
Affected households often rebuild their ancillary structure close to the main house or even 
attached (holding no 6, 8, 31, 35) rather placing them at a distance from each other which is a 
significant alteration in the indigenous practice of organizing their homestead. In most cases this 
annex building is a cowshed (6, 8, and 31) or sometimes kitchen (35) and constructed with more 
perishable material. The traditional U-shape or loose U-shape layout of the homestead comprises 
only 27.3% of the total homestead in the village. 
  
845 
 
  
 
Figure 14 Homestead with cattle shed attached with the main living block 
 
8.2.3. Practicing horticulture at homestead yard 
The indigenous practice of growing vegetables in the homestead garden is greatly disrupted by 
water logging phenomenon. Traditionally the garden was prepared a few meters away from the 
homestead, either at the front or at the back (Deka, N. and Bhagabati, A. K.,2011). As the area 
becomes waterlogged, land is scarce and to fulfill the domestic need of nutrition the households 
cultivate vegetable in the courtyard (holding no 1,2,7,12,17,19,20,21,23,24,27 31, 34, 36, 39). 
This autonomous practice of homestead horticulture by the household brings a morphological 
change in the homestead pattern as the once open courtyard is now tilling and often fenced with 
bamboo or fishing net in order to protect them from cattle and other domesticated animals. In 
general homestead garden is the only cultivated plot in the village and becomes a dry season 
activity in the lowlying part in particular. 
Table 7 No. of household practicing horticulture at homestead yard 
Dakhsin para  Beel baria Madha para  Uttar para  
5 / 18 4/ 6 4 / 14  3/16 
Ring gardening, floating vegetation etc are some new technologies which are introduced by the 
local NGO Samadhan and recently being practiced by the waterlogged villagers of Trimohani 
and Sagardari. (Adri,N., 2009).  
   
 
Figure 15 Households practice horticulture in their courtyard due to scarcity of dry land 
 
  
846 
 
Local people found ring gardening very useful where lands are mostly waterlogged as vegetation 
is accepted to grow at a higher level than the ground .In Maynapur village, however, none of 
these adaptive measures of homestead gardening  is practiced . 
8.3 Adaptation by retreat 
In case of Maynapur, adaptation by retreat is a reactive response of the household and practiced 
to cope with the extreme situation. After implementation of TRM some villagers have moved 
their ponds for fish culture (locally known as gher) inside the embankment. In case of the 
homestead outside the embankment, the meaning of adaptation is actually nothing but their act of 
survival. The most unfortunate households who have failed to survive in the extreme situation are 
forced to relocate and rebuild their homestead close to the embankment (holding no 28).  
      Besides these structural measures, in severe water logging period villagers often forced to 
migrate and take shelter to the nearest school or even pacca road. Villagers reported that no 
measure has been taken so far by the public agencies for planned retreat. Except few schools that 
serve as temporary shelter, there is no permanent shelter for the refugees in the union. 
 
Figure 16 Three autonomous measures of adaptation by retreat: a) Relocation of homestead or 
aquaculture land on high land or inside the embankment.  b) Migration to temporary shelter 
 
9. Synopsis 
When the hazard turns into a disaster, strategies to adaptation become nothing but the act of 
survival. Water logging in east Keshabpur is a disaster rather than hazard. Coping is, therefore, 
the other meaning of survival for the waterlogged villagers in Keshabpur. As water logging has 
manifold impacts on human settlement, measures taken by the community or household to adapt 
is also dynamic in response. Structural measure of adaptation is one of these dynamic responses 
by the households apart from the other socio-economic or agricultural measures. Due to this 
particular measure a significant change in the indigenous pattern of settlement and land use is 
observed. Both public agencies and local household are involved in the process. Not necessarily 
all their efforts were proved effective. For instance, the way TRM project was implemented  is 
reported as ‘unsuccessful’ by Operation Evaluation Department of ADB due to drying up of 
active River and heavy silt disposition, faulty design of drainage regulator, poor operation and 
maintenance (poorly located and/or maintained sluice gates), constrained the achievement of 
anticipated outcome [ADB ,2007].  The OED estimation shows that a relatively smaller area was 
free from water logging in March 2007 and water logging problem is more intensify in the 
villages adjacent to the project area as the agricultural lands inside the project area of these 
villages are now permanently inundated. However, people adapt until they cross their threshold 
  
847 
 
limit. In the process of adaptation, measures taken by the villagers often led to a change in the 
spatial structure of the indigenous settlement pattern. The following table summarizes the 
findings regarding copping efforts in Maynapur village and elsewhere in Keshabpur that 
significantly contributed to the morphological change of the settlement.  
Table 8 Adaptation in settlement pattern in waterlogged area 
 
 Action / measure Sector  Level  Stakeholder   Type of 
adaptation 
Tidal River Management 
(TRM) 
Water resource  Regional  Water 
development 
Board (GO) 
Planned, 
adopted from 
local practice   
Pr
ot
ec
tio
n 
Semi hard Embankment  Infrastructure  Community  Local Govt 
agencies  
Planned and 
autonomous  
Raising the base of deep 
tubelwell  
WATSAN Neighborhood/ 
Para  
Local Govt 
agencies 
Planned  
Establishment on sanitary 
toilet on raised plinth 
WATSAN Neighborhood/ 
Para 
Local Govt 
agencies 
Planned  
Adoption of permanent 
material for housing  
Housing  Household  Local 
practice  
Autonomous  
Raising the plinth level  Housing  Household  Local 
practice  
Autonomous 
Compact layout of the 
homestead structures  
Housing  Household  Local 
practice  
Autonomous  
Building Machan to store  
raw material for domestic 
fuel  
Housing   Household  Local 
practice  
Autonomous  
Practicing horticulture at 
homestead yard  
Domestic 
Agriculture 
Household  Local 
practice  
Autonomous  
Ring gardening  Domestic 
Agriculture 
Household Local NGO  Planned  
A
cc
om
m
od
at
io
n 
Floating garden (Baira) Domestic 
Agriculture 
Household Local NGO  Planned  
Relocation of homestead 
near embankment 
Housing  Household  Local 
practice 
Autonomous 
R
et
re
at
 
Take shelter to nearest 
school or pacca road  
Infrastructure  community Local 
practice 
Autonomous  
 
The table shows that except few most of the adaptation strategies of the households are 
autonomous and are not practiced by the every household uniformly. Choice of adaptation 
strategies for any structural modification is influenced by the relative risk exposure and financial 
ability ie adaptive capacity of the household. Households have individually adapted to their 
problems. No significant collective effort is seen for community based adaptation.  
 
 
  
848 
 
 
 
 
Most importantly, the survey shows that these individual efforts of the households and the 
applied protection measures of the public agencies all together have transformed the spatial 
pattern of the indigenous settlement. Settlements now become more compact with shifted spatial 
focus as priority is given to minimize the adverse impact rather than preservation of their cultural 
trait. Spatial segregation of homestead structures in traditional scheme, socio-cultural value of the 
courtyard or indigenous practice of forestry surrounding the homestead are often forfeited by the 
affected household due to constrain of dry land. Besides, the manmade embankment and 
institutional measures of water resource management significantly restrict the natural growth of 
the settlement and traditional practice of agriculture or even aquaculture in the study village. 
This, in turn, changes the land use pattern of the traditional rural settlement.  
      In conclusion, both protection and accommodation should be the strategies to adapt with 
water logging problem. Proper emphasis should be given to the fact that: protection measures 
against inundation by embankments interrupt the natural processes of land sedimentation and 
delta formation. This implies that quite a different approach may be required to face the problems 
in especially the seaward parts of Bangladesh. 
      As a protective measure TRM in rotational basis is probably the best option for removing 
water logging in the polder area. But implementation of TRM is very much difficult because of 
social reason as inhabitants need to let their own land and homestead area for implementing the 
project. However, priority should be given to derive more practical solution considering greater 
benefits rather than few beneficial. As the accommodation measures of adaptation are mostly 
practiced by the household individually and greatly influenced by their financial ability, 
incentives may be provided for the truly affected household after micro-level vulnerability 
assessment. Moreover, community based adaptation must be encouraged where NGO might play 
a vital role. Institutional initiative should be taken parallely for the development of the 
infrastructure and better access to the services and shelter (health facility, bazaar, school etc) at 
community level and access to amenities (fresh water supply, sanitation) at para or neighborhood 
level. 
 
 
Figure 17 Transformation of spatial structure of indigenous homestead pattern in 
SPATIAL STRUCTURE OF INDIGENOUS RURAL HOMESTEAD SPATIAL STRUCTURE OF HOMESTEAD AT WATRELOGGED AREA 
  
849 
 
References  
Adri, Neelopal and Islam, Ishrat (2010). Water Logging in Keshabpur: A Focus to the Coping 
Strategies of the People, (ICEAB10), Japan, p-33 
Adri, Neelopal (2009). Assessment of Vulnerability of People in a Waterlogged Area of 
Bangladesh, unpublished MURP thesis, BUET, p.77 
ADB (2007). Project Performance Evaluation Report in Bangladesh: Khulna-Jessore Drainage 
Rehabilitation Project, Operations Evaluation Department, Asian Development Bank. 
BBS (2001). Bangladesh Population Census -2001, Community Series, Zila: Jessore, Bangladesh 
bureau of statistics, planning division, ministry of planning, Govt. of People Republic 
Bangladesh. 
BBS (1981). Bangladesh Population Census -1981, Community Series, Zila: Jessore, Bangladesh 
bureau of statistics, planning division, ministry of planning, Govt. of People Republic 
Bangladesh. 
Climate Change Cell (CCC) (2009) ,Climate Change, Gender and Vulnerable Groups in 
Bangladesh, DoE, MoEF; Component 4b, CDMP, MoFDM, Dhaka 
Deka, N., Bhagabati, A. K. (2011). Rural Landuse in Brahmaputra Floodplain Environment, 
Assam: The case of Muktapur Village, published in Contemporary India , Vol 1, p-177-193. 
Ebdon, D.S (1985). Statistics on Gegraphy, London :Blackwell. 
EGIS (1998). Environmental and Social Impact assessment of Khulna-Jessore Drainage 
Rehabilitation Project, published by Environment and GIS Support Project for Water sector 
Planning (EGIS II), Ministry of Water Resource, Govt. of Bangladesh . 
Hammond, R. and McCullagh, P. (1974). Quantitative Techniques in Geography: an 
Introduction, Oxford: Clarendon. 
Hafiz, R. ( 2000) , Adapting Traditional Housing Design to Cope with Natural Hazards: Stilt 
Houses for Flood Prone Areas of Bangladesh, proceeding of the third housing and hazards , 
international conference, Dhaka, p.157 
IWM and CEGIS (2007). Investigating the Impact of Relative Sea Level Rise on Coastal 
Communities and their Livelihoods in Bangladesh, final report, UK department for 
Environment food and rural affairs.  
IWM (2005). Impact assessment of Climate Changes on the Coastal zone of Bangladesh, Water 
resource planning organization, WARPO, Ministry of Water resources, Bangaldesh Govt. 
Islam, Shahidul and Kibria, Zakir ( 2006). Unraveling KJDRP : ADB Financed Project of Mass 
Destruction in Southwest Coastal region of Bangladesh, Published by Uttaran, Tala, 
Satkhira, Bangladesh.  
Mclean, R.F. and Alla Tysban (2001). Coastal Zones and Marine Ecosystems in Climate Change 
2001: Impact, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Third 
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 
Nicholls, Robert J. (2003). Case Study on Sea-level Rise Impacts. OECD Workshop on the 
Benefits of Climate Policy: Improving Information for Policy Makers. 
Pelling, M. (2003). The Vulnerability of Cities: Natural Disasters and Social Resilience, 
Earthscan Publications, Sterling VA. 
Rahman, Atiur (1995). Beel Dakatia: The Environmental Consequences of a Development 
Disaster, University Press Limited.  
 
850 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
WATER SUPPLY & SANITATION FACILITIES ON LOW INCOME SLUM AREAS OF 
DHAKA CITY 
 
 
Subrata Chowdhury1 and Nusrat Rezwana Binte Razzak2 
 
 
ABSTRACT: Over the last decade, Dhaka city has experienced significant changes throughout 
its landscape and an extreme growth in population. As a result of environmental, economic or 
demographic crises, Pressure increase on housing due to rapid urbanization and rural urban 
migration causes growth of slums and squatter settlements. Slums are residential areas of very 
high population density, high room density and poor housing with inadequate access to basic 
civic amenities. The specific objectives of the study are to explore the basic facilities available in 
the slums & also to investigate the existing water supply, sanitation, and drainage facilities of 
selected slums in Dhaka city. Korail slum, Kachukhet slum and Bhasantek slum have been 
randomly selected. Field surveys and door to door interviews have been conducted to analyze 
present environmental condition. Outline of the possible solutions to the problems has been 
prepared. Overall environment of the slum areas is disappointing due to unplanned housing, 
drains, roads and different authorized & unauthorized shops. The waste management and 
sanitation scenario is not up to the mark & unhygienic. Due to the involvements of the 
Government, the DCC, and other national and international Non Government Organization 
(NGO) s, the slums are getting access to water supply, sanitation and solid waste management 
services; although these are still insufficient. Housing facilities, commercial facilities, access 
roads and sanitation facilities of the slums should be designed and implemented under approved 
master plan. Water supply, sanitation and drainage facilities can be developed by DCC to give the 
slum residents a healthy breathing environment. This is the proper time to take steps for making a 
well planned Dhaka city. 
 
 
  
1. Introduction  
 
The paper deals with the development of slums in Dhaka city focusing on water supply and 
sanitation facilities of the slums. The urban population of Bangladesh has experienced rapid 
growth since the late 1940s, after the withdrawal of the colonial British rule, and more so since 
                                                        
1 Assistant Professor, Department of  Civil Engineering, Stamford University Bangladesh, Dhaka, 
Bangladesh. subrata068@yahoo.com  
2Lecturer, Department of  Civil Engineering, Stamford University Bangladesh, Dhaka, Bangladesh.  
tithi_stu@yahoo.com  
 
 
851 
 
the early seventies, after the Independence of the country. In 1961, slightly more than 5% of the 
population lived in the urban areas. According to the 1991 census estimate, 20.15% of the 
country's population was urban whereas according to the 2001 census estimate, the percentage of 
the urban population was 23.39% of country's population [1]. Correspondingly; the level of 
urbanization in Bangladesh probably stands to over 25% by now. The growth rate of urbanization 
in Bangladesh is more than three to four times higher than that of the national population growth 
rate. The current rate of urban growth (above 4 per cent) is one of the highest in Asia. Dhaka, the 
capital and also the primate city of the country, grows at nearly 5 per cent annually. Rapid urban 
growth in Bangladesh has been created adverse effects on different sectors. Some adverse effects 
are mass poverty, increase of slums and squatters, inadequate supply of urban facilities such as 
water electricity, solid waste disposal, sanitation, sewerage, fuel or cooking etc. and degradation 
of social, neighborhood and physical environment. Mainly the poor in the slums are deprived 
from all urban facilities. Most of the people live below the poverty line in the slums and they all 
are deprived from the urban facilities according to the demand. The water supply and sanitation 
situation in the slum areas of Dhaka city is very poor. The water supply coverage in the slums is 
about 69%, the sanitary latrines coverage is only 48% [2]. The remaining people use unhygienic 
latrines or practice open defecation - unhygienic pit latrines (without water-seal or connected to 
pen drains) coverage is 36% and rest 16% people use hanging latrines or practice open defecation. 
About 59% slums are poorly drained. The crisis of water supply and sanitation facilities is a 
common feature in daily life of slum people of Dhaka city. So, it is an immediate concern to 
study and assess the present scenario of water and sanitation facilities for slum dwellers in this 
city. So, essential goal of the study is to investigate of water supply and sanitation facilities for 
some selected slums in Dhaka city. 
 
 
2. Poverty and Slums in Dhaka City  
 
The phenomenon of slums and squatters in Dhaka is as old as the city itself [3]. But the city has 
experienced a prolific growth of slums and squatters since the independence of the country in 
1971 [4]. By the end of 1976 only 10 slums existed with a population of 10,000. The number 
increased to 2,156 settlements with a population of 718,143 in 1993, and 3007 settlements with a 
population of 1.1 million in 1996 [5]. About 90% of the total number of slums and squatter 
settlements have developed in the last three decades. The highest concentration of growth (45%) 
took place between 1981 and 1990 followed by the previous decade’s 26%. Only 18% of these 
clusters were established since 1991. Slums and squatter settlements are not distributed uniformly 
throughout the Dhaka Metropolitan area but rather they are concentrated mostly on the fringes of 
the city. Due to an acute demand for land and high land prices, especially in the central zones and 
in upper class residential areas, the slums and squatter communities have moved or are moving 
towards the city’s peripheries in the search for cheap shelter [6]. According to CUS among the 
3007 slums and squatter settlements an overwhelming majority of these poor communities are 
located on land owned by private individuals (1270 clusters, or 42.2%), or under multiple private 
ownership (1047 clusters or 34.8%). Only 644 clusters (21.4%) are located on government and 
semi-government land, while a few settlements (only 35 in number, 1.2%) are found on land 
belonging to non-government organizations [5].  
 
The demographic features of the slum population are too some extent different from the other 
urban population. There is a high propensity of young people to migrate to the city of Dhaka. 
852 
 
More than 50% of ‘migrant populations’ in the city were less than 35 years of age [7]. The 
distinctive aspect of urban poverty in Dhaka City’s slums is its close connection with recent 
migration. The slum dwellers have mostly migrated to the city from rural areas. As Dhaka is well 
linked to the entire country by land, water and air, and can be reached within a day from any part 
of the country, there are opportunities for migrants to arrive in the city using transport within their 
reach [8]. The rural poor migrate to Dhaka City due to some push and pull factors. The push 
factors include over-population, floods and natural disasters, river erosion, growing landlessness 
and exploitation by the rural elites and moneylenders. In this agriculture based countries land is 
the main means to generate subsistence and surplus and is the most valuable asset to the rural 
poor. Increased loss and fragmentation of land among the poor and increased concentration of 
land among the rich, coupled with a high natural growth rate of population raise the number of 
landless and the hungry. In the absence of other sustenance opportunities in villages, many of the 
landless in rural Bangladesh are forced to migrate to cities to seek better opportunities although 
their chances of improving their conditions are limited [9]. Along with push factors the pull 
factors also contribute to the increasing rural-urban migration in Bangladesh. These pull factors 
are mainly employment opportunities in the informal sectors of the economy, better opportunities 
in the city and relative freedom for female workers. 
  
The slum population in Dhaka City faces extreme poverty due to its low level of earnings and the 
majority are living below the poverty line in terms of both calorie intake and cost of basic needs. 
The slum dwellers are mostly involved in low paid jobs in informal sectors of the urban economy. 
To be precise there is a predominance of day labouring and rickshaw pulling among this poor 
group of city dwellers [10]. Moreover, there are occupational variations between males and 
females in slum and squatter settlements in Dhaka City. Females are found to belong only to 
occupations such as maidservants and housewives [11]. Slum populations in Dhaka City are 
‘vulnerable’ in terms of their access to urban land [12]. Slum dwellers have mostly settled 
temporarily on public or private land and they are often evicted from their settlements. In the 
overwhelming majority of house construction the roof is of tin and the wall beams are of bamboo. 
Only a small proportion of poor settlements (9%) were made of brick, cement and tin [13]. About 
68% of slum families in Dhaka City have a single room unit, 20% have two small rooms and at 
least 5% have to share a room with other families [14]. The average floor spaces of poor urban 
households are only 125sq. ft, with only 100 sq. ft in Dhaka City [15].  
 
Slum dwellers in the city are disadvantaged in terms of their access to urban services like safe 
water, electricity, gas supply, toilet facilities and garbage disposal. The quality of these services 
has been found to be poor and the supply remains highly irregular and inadequate [16]. Most 
slum dwellers have access to safe water for drinking purpose only. And most use unsafe water for 
washing, bathing and other purposes. A small proportion of the urban poor (20%) use sanitary 
latrines and the majority still use a variety of non-hygienic latrines [5]. The study shows that 67% 
use electricity and another 33% still have no access to electricity. The study also found that 72% 
of the urban poor use traditional fuel for cooking and only 22% have access to gas facilities. 
More than 60% of the poor just dump their garbage on the road or on the ground [17]. And a very 
small proportion (12.4%) of these poor households has access to the underground drainage 
system [18]. Slum populations also have limited access to heath and education. Though 
theoretically the urban poor have equal access to the public health facilities in the city, in reality 
very little are available to them [19]. They are the most deprived groups in the city as they have 
very limited access to the existing educational opportunities. This is true for both primary 
853 
 
education and general and technical education for adults. It has been evident from official 
statistics that although enrolment in primary school in urban areas is higher than that for rural 
areas, the enrolment of the slum population is very low [20].  
 
 
3. Water Supply and Sanitation System 
 
Sanitation involves the study and use of hygienic measures to ensure safe and reliable water 
supply, proper drainage of wastewater, proper disposal of human wastes, and prompt removal of 
all refuse. The word sanitation actually refers to all conditions that affect health, and according to 
the World Health Organization may include such things as food sanitation, rainwater drainage, 
solid waste disposal and atmospheric pollution. The principal objectives of providing sanitation 
facilities are to maintain and improve public health and to minimize environmental pollution. 
Sanitation can contribute greatly to preventing spread of infectious diseases through transmission 
of disease causing agents into the body of a healthy person by different media such as 
contaminated foods and water, contact with contaminated soil. The government supports 
involvement of NGOs and private organizations in water and sanitation development, particularly 
in the development of different types of tube wells and latrines and in piped water supply where 
feasible. Finally, the National Water Plan supports provision of credit facilities for the poor to 
enable them to bear the cost of water and sanitation services independently.  
 
 
4. Methodology  
 
An inception report has been prepared based on the initial discussion with various stakeholders 
for outlining the scope of the work and the major information requirement for the study. various 
relevant reports, project documents, existing literature have been reviewed and consulted. 
Interviews/discussions have been done with important stakeholders including NGOs, 
development partners, and Government officials. Korail slum, Kachukhet slum and Bhasantek 
slum have been randomly selected to assess the present environmental conditions with different 
options on the basis of types of available facilities, rules & regulations including management of 
Dhaka North City Corporation (DNCC). Field surveys and door to door interviews have been 
conducted to explore the basic facilities available in the slums & also to investigate the existing 
water supply, sanitation, and drainage facilities of selected slums in Dhaka city. Analysis of water 
supply, sanitary and solid waste management systems have been done. Outline of the possible 
solutions to the problems has been prepared. Required secondary data for this study was collected 
from various published and unpublished sources to know the present status of water supply and 
sanitation facilities of the study areas. This study has been tried to find out that specific problems 
and prospects of management system of water supply and sanitation facilities for the study area. 
In this way, the research facilities will hopefully help to improve the condition of water supply 
and sanitation facilities for urban poor in Dhaka city. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
854 
 
5. Results and Discussion 
 
5.1 Information and Location about the Study Areas 
 
Kachukhet slum is under Dhaka Cantonment Board, Kafrul Thana, Bhasantek and Korail slum 
are under Cantonment and Gulshan Thana. Table 1 shows some basic information about selected 
slums and photos 1, 2 & 3 shows the location of the slums on satellite image. 
 
  
Figure 1: Satellite image showing the location of Korail Slum 
 
 
Figure 2: Satellite image showing the location of Bhasantek slum 
  
Figure 3: Satellite image showing the location of Kachukhet slum (Source: Google Earth) 
 
855 
 
Table 1 Information about selected slums 
 
 Korail Slum [21] Bhasantek Slum Kachukhet Bazaar slum 
Permanency 49 Years 35 years 34 years 
Area 85 Acres 48 Acres 12 Acres 
Number of 
households 1100 712 1062 
Population 80000 14332 
9929 (permanent 
2377 & 
Temporary 7552) 
Water Facility 
2 water points 
(1DNCC and 
1DWASA) 
1water point 
(DWASA) 
1 water point (CB) 
& partly MES 
Sanitation 
350 water seal latrines, 
250 bucket latrines, 
520 hanging latrines 
489 water seal 
latrines, 
127 pit latrines &  
229 bucket latrines 
592 water seal 
latrines, 
58 bucket latrines 
Drainage facility Discontinuous semi-pucca drain No drain 
Discontinuous semi-
pucca drain 
Solid waste disposal Open place Open place Open place 
 
 
5.2 Water Supply Condition of the Slums 
 
Water supply facilities in the slums are provided by the Non Government organisation (NGO)s 
through water point from Dhaka Water Supply and Sewerage Authority (DWASA), Dhaka North 
City Corporation (DNCC) and Cantonment Board (CB). Water point is basically water storage 
facility where water is stored from WASA main lines. In the slums where the above facilities are 
absent or inadequate, the inhabitants use maximum water sources of DWASA and very few 
numbers depend on adjacent water bodies like ponds. However, the main source of drinking 
water is the DWASA supply water. Photo 4 shows direct water collection from DWASA water 
point, water distribution through plastic water pipes and domestic storage of water in Korail Slum. 
 
 
   
 
Figure 4 Existing Water supply facilities of Korail slum 
856 
 
 
   
 
Photo 5 Existing Water supply facilities of Bhasantek slum 
 
    
 
Figure 6 Existing Water supply facilities of Kachukhet slum 
  
Photo 5 shows direct water collection from tube-well, overhead water tank for water storage and 
pond in Bhasantek Slum. Photo 6 shows a tube-well, queue for drinking water collection and 
Water pump in Kachukhet slum. 
 
5.4 Sanitation Condition of the Slums 
 
Sanitation scenario is very alarming in the slum areas. The commonly available sanitation  
 
   
 
Figure 7 Sanitation and environmental condition of Korail slum 
857 
 
   
 
Figure 8 Sanitation and environmental condition of Bhasantek slum 
 
   
 
Figure 9 Sanitation and environmental condition of Kachukhet slum 
 
facilities in the selected slums are pit latrines, bucket latrines and water seal latrines. Most of  
the latrines are not hygienic and environmental friendly. It is observed that most of the children of 
below 8 years specially generally use the yard, drain and the places near the tube-wells for 
defecating. In photo 7, some children of Korail slum are playing in un hygienic condition near a 
open wastewater storage tank. It also shows building pit latrines an d domestic waste collection 
of Korail slum. Photo 8 shows unhygienic latrines of Bhasantek slum and surrounding polluted 
water bodies. Photo 9 shows domestic waste storage near one entrance point of Kachukhet slum. 
It also shows cooking work in unhygienic environment and separate community latrines for male 
and female users.  
 
6. Major Findings from Questionnaire Survey 
 
A questionnaire survey was conducted upon 100 respondents (selected randomly) for each 
selected slums. A summary of the responses obtained from the questionnaire study is shown in 
figure 1. It is observed from the study that in the slums water supply, Sanitation, drainage and 
solid waste disposal facilities are contemptible. The inhabitants use maximum water sources of 
DWASA and very few depend on adjacent water bodies. Sanitation situation is worse than water 
supply in the low cost areas. No slum has separate sanitation locks for male and female users. 
There is practically no drainage arrangement in any of the slums. In most cases kacha (earthen) 
makeshift channels are used to remove the excess water from the immediate vicinity of the water 
sources without leading to any other main drainage system. Most of the existing drains remain 
858 
 
blocked with garbage or solid waste. In wet season the situation becomes even worse. The slums 
remain water logged with waste water for a long time. In the slum areas there are door to door 
waste collection system by which wastes are disposed off both at DCC communal bins and open 
spaces or roadside areas. Some organizations are trying to improve the condition of water supply 
and sanitation supply for urban poor in Dhaka city with different approaches [22]. But the crisis 
of water supply and sanitation facilities is a common feature in daily life of urban poor. So, it is 
an immediate concern to study the approaches of different organization related to water and 
sanitation facilities for urban poor in this city. 
 
From questionnaire survey of Korail slum it is observed that that people living this slum are 
commonly poor, their occupation & monthly income can’t fulfils their essential needs. Only 7% 
people have personal land and 52% of the land owner is Bangladesh Government. 72% family 
has 5-8 members in their family. 21% people have been living in the slum for about 3-5 years 
among them 42% people are working in garment or industries and 47% people are driving 
Rickshaw. Throughout this survey it is observed that slum dwellers are facing problems in 
fetching water from DWASA water source which is far away and crowded. The surrounding 
environment is unsuitable for fetching water for women in the Korail slum area. Korail slum area 
has almost 80000 populations but the numbers of water seal latrines are 359, bucket latrines are 
250, hanging latrines are 520 and all the latrines are not hygienic and environmental friendly [21].  
64% respondents said that they are not satisfied about the existing facilities like water supply, 
sanitation, drainage and solid waste disposal system of the slum area. The Data was collected for 
common water borne diseases in korail slum. The major diseases they are suffering from 
Diarrhea 50%, Dysentery 34%and skin disease 13%.From the questionnaire survey of Bhasantek 
slum it is found out that 79% of water demand is fulfilled by DWASA and 21% by Cantonment 
board water supply. The major diseases they are suffering from Diarrhoea 35%, Dysentery 
40%and skin disease 3%. 88% respondents said that they are not satisfied about the existing 
facilities like water supply, sanitation, drainage and solid waste disposal system of the slum area 
where 9% people remain unanswered. The level of hygiene knowledge and practice has been 
found to be significantly low among the slum dwellers. 68% people of Kachukhet slum dwellers 
are getting drinking from DWASA water supply where 20% people getting water from shallow 
tube well and 12% from Cantonment Board water supply. 70% respondents said that they are not 
satisfied about the existing facilities like water supply, sanitation, drainage and solid waste 
disposal system of the slum area where 4% people remain unanswered. The major diseases they 
are suffering from Diarrhea 46%, Dysentery 36%and skin disease 2%. 18% people have been 
living in the slum for about 3-5 years among them 33% people are working in garment or 
industries and 28% people are driving Rickshaw. 
  
Rapid urbanization causes shift in rural livelihood base and often result in migration of the farm 
laborers to off-farm activities in the cities. Migration is broadly defined as a relocation of 
residence for a specified duration and various reasons [23]. From the questionnaire survey it is 
found that major causes of migration are search of work, extreme poverty, loss of income so
urces, failure to repay NGO loan and higher income probability in urban areas which is 
shown in Figure 2. 
 
 
 
 
859 
 
 
 
 
                       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2 Causes of Migration 
 
7. Conclusions and Recommendations 
 
The level of sanitation knowledge and practice has been found to be extensively low among the 
   
   
   
 
Figure 1 Results of Questionnaire study 
860 
 
slum dwellers. The water supply and sanitation condition are improving gradually. Most of the 
slum people use tube well water and supplied water by DWASA for drinking. Significant amount 
of open defecation is also noticed. Normally slums have pit latrines which are not totally germ-
free. Ground-water contamination is a common criterion of most of the slums. Solid waste 
management and the sewerage and drainage system are the most ignored sectors in the 
development programmes of the slums. Relentless water pollution of the water bodies, canals and 
drains occurs due to open disposal of human excreta. It is observed that houses, shops, drains, 
roads etc have been constructed in unplanned manner and solid wastes are stored on open places 
in the slum areas. Disposal of solid wastes and wastewater in open space and open drains also 
causes a severe perilous condition. For lack of sufficient water sources, most people resort to 
unsafe water sources like ponds, rivers and even ditches which cause sufferings from diseases. 
Moreover, unauthorized garments and other shops, tea stalls, street hawkers etc, have made the 
entry points of the slums crowded and overall environment disappointed and hazardous. The 
deteriorated scenario causes severe environmental degradation affecting the environment of entire 
Dhaka city. Slum people are struggling against poverty and trying to improve their economic 
condition and standard of living.  
 
The principle conclusions drawn from the study are as follows: 
 
 The road management, sanitation system and the development of Kachuket slum is very 
much poor than other residential area of Dhaka cantonment because of lacking proper 
steps. 
 Due to unplanned housing, shops, drains, roads and different hawker activities, overall 
environment is unsatisfactory and the waste management is hazardous in Kachukhet slum. 
 Due to the intervention of various NGO’s in slum improvement programs, specially in 
Korail slum, the slums are getting access to water supply, sanitation and solid waste 
management services, although these are still inadequate. 
 The waste water disposal service is the most neglected one in the study areas. 
 Slums located in DNCC areas adjacent to Dhaka Cantonment are not properly receiving 
attention from service providers and are in poorer condition compared to slums located in 
low-cost residential areas within the Dhaka Cantonment Chaptered areas. 
  
On the basis of findings the following recommendations may be suggested 
 
 The Dhaka Cantonment Board (DCB) authority should design a master plan for an ideal 
market and implement it at Kachukhet slum according to the requirements of modern and 
latest architectural concept. 
 According to the above master plan buildings, shops, drains, roads etc. should be re-
constructed and replaced and further extension would also be carried out using approved 
master plan of DCC. In some cases,  
 Currently, the slum areas are unplanned and are in environmentally hazardous conditions. 
So in the slum areas, planned low-cost structures should be built and sanitation and 
drainage facilities can be developed by DCC to give the slum population base a healthy 
living environment. Because, this is the proper time to take steps for making a well 
planned city. 
 Initiatives for private and NGOs participation should be promoted in the distribution of 
water to the low income slum communities. Again NGOs should be encouraged and 
861 
 
offered the best facilities for taking more programs in slum area on sanitation and solid 
waste management sectors. 
 As inadequate sanitation and hygiene behaviour is very common among the slum 
community, so necessary and effective steps should be taken in this regard. Unhygienic 
hanging latrines and open defecation should be discouraged. Public toilet facilities are to 
be increased involving slum dwellers, NGOs and DWASA.  
 Enthusiastic hygiene education program should be imparted to slum dwellers and social 
mobilization programmes should be undertaken to make people aware of the bad effects 
of unhygienic situations.  
 Finally, there should be a coordinated plan considering all the stakeholders like 
Government, Dhaka North City Corporation, DWASA, Dhaka Cantonment Board, NGOs, 
the slum dwellers, environmental conservation groups and service providers to authorize 
the activities of different stakeholders for improving overall development programmmes 
of the slums.  
 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
The authors express their sincere appreciation and heartiest thanks to Md. Asaduzzaman, Md. 
Pavel Rejwan, Md. Arifur Hossain & Md. Rabin Hasan, students of Department of in Civil 
Engineering of Stamford University Bangladesh for their unconditional co-operation and help in 
the data collection through questionnaire survey.  
 
 
 
References 
 
1. Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics. (2001). Population and Housing Census Report Statistics 
Division, Ministry of Planning, Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh 
2. Capacity Building Service Group (CBSG). (2010). Ensuring Services to Slum Dwellers 
Dhaka, Water Service Delivery, Organisation for Low Income and Slum Community, WASA  
3. Taylor J., (1840). Sketch of the Topography and Statistics of Dacca, Military Orphan Press, 
1964; Geddes P. (1917). Town Planning Report on Dhaka, Bengal, Bengal Secretariat Pub. , 
Calcutta & Arams C. (1964). Housing in the Modern World, Man’s Struggle for Shelter in 
Urbanising World.  
4. Qadir S.R. (1975). Bastees of Dhaka City: A Study of Squatter Settlement, National Institute 
of Local Government, Dhaka.  
5. Centre for Urban Studies (1996). Survey of Slums and Squatter Settlements in Dhaka City., 
Dhaka.  
6. Mahbub A.Q.M. and Islam N., (2008). The growth of slums in Dhaka City: a spatio temporal 
analysis. in S. U. Ahmed (ed.) Dhaka Past Present Future, Asiatic Society of Bangladesh,  
pp.508-521. Bangladesh e-Journal of Sociology. Volume 5 Number 1. January 2008. Dhaka. 
7. Afsar R., (2000). Rural-Urban Migration in Bangladesh: Causes, Consequences and 
Challenges, University Press Limited, Dhaka.  
8. Islam N., (1996) Dhaka: From City to Mega City, Urban Studies Program, Dhaka.  
9. Alamgir J., (1993). Rural-urban migration in Bangladesh: theoretical approaches to 
understanding the internal and external dynamics. Journal of Social Studies, Vol. 59, pp. 26-
862 
 
48  
10. Amin A.T.M.N., (1991) Dhaka’s informal Sectors and its role in the transmission of 
Bangladesh economy, Dhaka Past Present Future, Asiatic Society of Bangladesh, 1991 
pp.446-470, Dhaka.  
11. Centre for Urban Studies (1983). Slums in Dhaka City, Dhaka.  
12. Hossain S. (2008). Poverty and vulnerability in megacities: the case of slum communities in 
Dhaka City, Bangladesh Paper Presented in the 2005. Annual Conference of the Australian 
Sociological Association (TASA), 5-8 December, 2005, University of Tasmania, Hobart, 
Australia. Bangladesh e-Journal of Sociology. Volume 5 Number 1.  
13. Mahbub A.Q.M., (1996). Rent affordability and rent polices for slum dwellers in Dhaka City, 
Urban Bangladesh Urban Studies Program, Dhaka.  
14. Centre for Urban Studies (1979). The Urban Poor in Bangladesh, Dhaka.  
15. Islam N., Huda N., Narayan F.B. and Rana P.B. (1997). Addressing the Urban Poverty 
Agenda in Bangladesh , University Press Limited, Dhaka.  
16. Centre for Urban Studies (1993). Survey of Slums in Dhaka Metropolitan Area-1991, Dhaka, 
& Hossain S. (1992). Research on slums and squatters in Bangladesh: a critical review’ in 
Social Science Review, Vol.18, no.2, pp.67-76.  
17. Ahsan R.M. and Ahmed N., (1996). The urban poor’s access to water and sanitation, The 
Urban Poor in Bangladesh , Centre for Urban Studies, Dhaka.  
18. Siddiqui K., Qadir S.R., Alamgir S. and. Haq S., (1993). Social Formation in Dhaka City, 
University Press Limited, Dhaka.  
19. Fariduddin K.M. and Khan A.U., (1996). Health profile of the urban poor, Urban Poor in 
Bangladesh , Centre for Urban Studies, Dhaka.  
20. Ministry of Education, Government of Bangladesh (2008). Zila Primary Education Statistics. 
Bangladesh e-Journal of Sociology. Volume 5 Number 1.  
21. Pramanik B., Sarker D. C. and Sarker R. C., (2011). Assessment of Water Supply and 
Sanitation Facilities for Korail Slum in Dhaka City. International Journal of Civil & 
Environmental Engineering, IJCEE-IJENS Vol: 11 No: 05 115, pp 115-128. 
22. Hossain S., (2008). Rapid Urban Growth and Poverty in Dhaka City, Bangladesh e-Journal 
of Sociology, Volume 5 Number 1, pp 1-21 
23. Ullah A.K.M.A., (2004). Bright City Lights and Slums of Dhaka city: Determinants of rural-
urban migration in Bangladesh, Migration Letters – Vol.1, No.1, pp 26-41 
 
 
  
863 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
A COMPARATIVE STUDY ON NATURAL AGGREGATE CONCRETE AND 
RECYCLED AGGREGATE CONCRETE 
 
 
Farhana Chowdhury1 and Subrata Chowdhury2 
 
 
ABSTRACT: Cement concrete is one of the most commonly used construction materials in our 
construction industry. But for its suitability and adaptability with respect to the changing 
environment, concrete must be such that it can conserve resources, protect the environment and 
economize & lead to the proper utilization of energy as well. Now a days concrete recycling is 
becoming an increasingly popular way to utilize aggregate left behind when structures are 
demolished. In the past, this debris was disposed of in landfills, but with more attention being 
paid to environmental concern, concrete recycling allows reuse of this rubble while keeping 
construction cost down. An attempt has been made to find out the feasibility of using recycled 
aggregate concrete (RAC) instead of natural aggregate concrete (NAC) in this study. Six sets of 
concrete cylinders have been prepared for compressive strength test using 1:1.5:3 mix design 
ratio of which three sets are of natural aggregate concrete and rest of the three sets are of recycled 
aggregate concrete. In this study, recycled aggregate from breaking of pile head which gone 
through a freeze thaw cycle of about four months is used and the compressive strength of the 
specimens were tested at 14, 21 and 28 days apart. From the test results, it is revealed that 
compressive strength of recycled aggregate concrete is 35% lower than natural aggregate 
concrete. At the same time, from economic point of view, 27 % cost can be saved if one cubic 
feet (cft) of recycled concrete is used instead of one cft of natural aggregate concrete. Though 
compressive strength of recycled concrete is much lower than natural aggregate concrete still 
recycled concrete has proved advantageous in pavements and roadway construction, in retaining 
walls and even in landscaping . 
 
 
1. Introduction  
 
Any construction activity requires several materials such as concrete, steel, brick, stone, glass, 
clay, mud, wood, and so on. However, the cement concrete remains the main construction 
material used in construction industries. This huge dependence on concrete would be justified if it 
helps not only to construct but also to conserve energy& resources, protect environment and also 
to minimize cost [1]. To achieve this, major emphasis must be laid on the use of wastes and 
                                                        
1 Assistant Professor, Department of Civil Engineering, Stamford University Bangladesh, Dhaka, 
Bangladesh.  shumi_buet@yahoo.com  
2Assistant Professor, Department of Civil Engineering, Stamford University Bangladesh, Dhaka, 
Bangladesh.  subrata068@yahoo.com 
 
864 
 
byproducts in cement and concrete used for new constructions. The utilization of recycled 
aggregate is particularly very promising as 75 per cent of concrete is made of aggregates [3]. In 
that case, the aggregates considered are slag, power plant wastes, recycled concrete, mining and 
quarrying wastes, waste glass, incinerator residue, red mud, burnt clay, sawdust, combustor ash 
and foundry sand. The enormous quantities of demolished concrete are available at various 
construction sites, which are now posing a serious problem of disposal in urban areas. This can 
easily be recycled as aggregate and used in concrete. The recycling and reuse of construction & 
demolition wastes seems feasible solution in rehabilitation and new constructions after the natural 
disaster or demolition of old structures. This becomes very important especially for those 
countries where national and local policies are stringent for disposal of construction and 
demolition wastes with guidance, penalties, levies etc.  
 
Concrete is one of the most important construction materials. Approximately one ton of concrete  
is used per capita per year throughout the world. This enormous dependence on concrete requires 
an economic justification to seek improvements and new applications for a material that has been, 
in more ways than one, the foundation of major construction works. Concrete recycling usually 
involves cement concrete pavements along roadways. Meanwhile, advances in the design and 
construction of concrete structures since World War II imply demolition and disposal problems 
for the concrete components in these structures when they eventually reach the end of their useful 
lives. The need to recycle concrete components may be more than just cost-oriented. Advantages 
of recycling concrete pavements include reduced costs from aggregate produced on the job; 
reduced disposal costs and environmental damage; and help the conservation of natural resources, 
i.e. aggregate and energy. Moreover, valuable landfill space is not used up. Recycled coarse 
aggregates may be more durable than virgin materials because they have gone through years of 
freeze-thaw cycles [7]. Conservation of natural resources includes reductions in the use of 
petroleum-based products and Portland cement, in aggregate quarrying and in iron ore mining. 
The fact that asphalt concrete, Portland cement concrete and iron can be recycled completely 
without requiring disposal also indirectly contributes to efforts for preserving the environment. 
Recycled concrete has proved advantageous not only in pavement and road building but also 
encourages its use in residential construction as well [4]. In the Netherlands, so much work is 
being done regarding the recycling of C&D waste in order to produce aggregates that a 
framework for a certification system 
 
2. Objectives of the Study  
 
The main objective of the study is to check out the feasibility of using recycled aggregate 
concrete instead of natural aggregate concrete. The study also reveals the fact of using 
demolished concrete as coarse aggregate in newly formed concrete by comparing the mechanical 
property of demolished concrete as aggregate with natural coarse aggregate, by comparing the 
compressive strength of natural aggregate concrete with recycled aggregate concrete at different 
days and also by comparing the costs of both materials as well.  
 
3. Recycled Aggregate Concrete 
 
When structures made of concrete are demolished or renovated, concrete recycling is an 
increasingly common method of utilizing the rubble. Concrete was once routinely trucked to 
landfills for disposal, but recycling has a number of benefits that have made it a more attractive 
865 
 
option in this age of greater environmental awareness, more environmental laws, and the desire to 
keep construction costs down. Without recycling, some important metals would be entirely used 
up in the next 50 to 100 years. For example, there would be no more zinc by 2037 without 
recycling. Normal landfills, where regular trash goes, give off many toxic and dangerous 
chemicals. These include gases that contribute to acid rain. Especially important to the world 
today is the release of methane and carbon dioxide. Both are greenhouse gases and contribute to 
climate change. It takes less energy to recycle old products than make new ones entirely from 
'scratch' [2]. For instance, it takes little energy to recycle an aluminum can. However, it takes a 
lot of energy to produce entirely new aluminum cans as it is expensive to extract aluminum from 
its ore. It creates jobs and stimulates the economy. People have to drive trucks to pick up the 
recycling and the recycling plants employ lots of workers. Concrete aggregate collected from 
demolition sites is put through a crushing machine. Crushing facilities accept only 
uncontaminated concrete, which must be free of trash, wood, paper and other such materials. 
Metals such as rebar are accepted, since they can be removed with magnets and other sorting 
devices and melted down for recycling elsewhere.  
 
Smaller pieces of concrete are used as gravel for new construction projects. Sub-base gravel is 
laid down as the lowest layer in a road, with fresh concrete or asphalt poured over it. The 
Government as well as Roads and Highway division may use techniques such as these to build 
new highways from the materials from old highways. Crushed recycled concrete can also be used 
as the dry aggregate for brand new concrete if it is free of contaminants. Larger pieces of crushed 
concrete, such as riprap, can be used for erosion control. With proper quality control at the 
crushing facility, well graded and aesthetically pleasing materials can be provided as a substitute 
for landscaping stone. Wire gabions (cages), can be filled with crushed concrete and stacked 
together to provide economical retaining walls. Stacked gabions are also used to build privacy 
screen walls (in lieu of fencing) 
 
3.1. Advantages of Recycled Aggregate Concrete 
 
There are various uses and advantages of recycled concrete as aggregate over natural aggregates. 
Some of the advantages are as follows:  
 
 Using recycled concrete is an accepted source of aggregate into new concrete by ASTM 
and AASHTO. 
 It is of high quality and meeting or exceeding all applicable state and federal 
specifications. 
 Recycled aggregates are lighter weight per unit of volume, which means less weight per 
cubic ft, resulting in reduced material costs and overall project costs. Recycled aggregate 
weighs ten to fifteen percent (10%-15%) less than virgin quarry products (concrete). 
 Recycled aggregates offer a way to reduce landfill waste streams.  
 Recycled aggregates provide for superior compaction and constructability. 
 
4. Research Background of Recycled Aggregate Concrete  
 
The extensive research on recycled concrete aggregate and recycled aggregate concrete (RAC) 
has started from year 1945 in various part of the world after second world war, but it blooms 
rapidly in between 1945-1977. First effort has been made by Nixon in 1977 who complied all the 
866 
 
work examined the basic properties of concrete in which the aggregate is the product of crushing 
another concrete, where other concentrated on old laboratory specimens. However, a 
comprehensive state-of-the-art document on the recycled aggregate concrete has been presented 
by Hansen & others in 1992 in which detailed analysis of data has been made, leading towards 
preparation of guidelines for production and utilization of recycled aggregate concrete [3]. It has 
been estimated that approximately 180 million tones of construction & demolition waste are 
produced each year in European Union. In general, in EU, 500 Kg of construction rubble and 
demolition waste correspond annually to each citizen. Indicatively 10% of used aggregates in UK 
are RCA, whereas 78,000 tons of RCA were used in Holland in 1994. The Netherland produces 
about 14million tons of buildings and demolition wastes per annum in which about 8 million tons 
are recycled mainly for unbound road base courses. The 285 million tons of per annum 
construction waste produced in Germany, out of which 77 million tons are demolition waste. 
Approximately 70% of it is recycled and reused in new construction work. It has been estimated 
that approximately 13 million tons of concrete is demolished in France every year whereas in 
Japan total quantity of concrete debris is in the tune of 10-15 million tons each year. The Hong 
Kong generates about 20 million tons demolition debris per year and facing serious problem for 
its disposal. USA is utilizing approximately 2.7 billion tons of aggregate annually out of which 
30-40% are used in road works and balance in structural concrete work. The rapid development 
in research on the use of RCA for the production of new concrete has also led to the production of 
concrete of high strength/performance. In Indian Status there is severe shortage of infrastructural 
facilities like houses, hospitals, roads etc. In India and large quantities of construction materials 
for creating these facilities are needed. The planning Commission allocated approximately 50% 
of capital outlay for infrastructure development in successive 10th & 11th five year plans. Rapid 
infrastructural development such highways, airports etc. and growing demand for housing has led 
to scarcity & rise in cost of construction materials. Most of waste materials produced by 
demolished structures disposed off by dumping them as land fill. Dumping of wastes on land is 
causing shortage of dumping place in urban areas. Therefore, it is necessary to start recycling and 
re-use of demolition concrete waste to save environment, cost and energy. Central Pollution 
Control Board has estimated current quantum of solid waste generation in India to the tune of 48 
million tons per annum out of which, waste from construction industry only accounts for more 
than 25%. Management of such high quantum of waste puts enormous pressure on solid waste 
management system. In view of significant role of recycled construction material and technology 
in the development of urban infrastructure, TIFAC has conducted a techno-market survey on 
'Utilization of Waste from Construction Industry' targeting housing/building and road segment. 
The total quantum of waste from construction industry is estimated to be 12 to 14.7 million tons 
per annum out of which 7-8 million tons are concrete and brick waste. According to findings of 
survey, 70% of the respondent have given the reason for not adopting recycling of waste from 
Construction Industry is "Not aware of the recycling techniques" while remaining 30% have 
indicated that they are not even aware of recycling possibilities. Further, the user agencies/ 
industries pointed out that presently, the BIS and other codal provisions do not provide the 
specifications for use of recycled product in the construction activities. 
 
 
5. Methodology 
 
To find out the feasibility of using recycled concrete instead of natural aggregate concrete, 
recycled concrete was collected from breaking of pile head which gone through a freeze thaw 
867 
 
cycle of about four months .The concrete thus collected was broken into pieces of approximately 
25 mm down grade with the help of hammer and crusher. The foreign matters were sorted out 
from the pieces. Further, those pieces were sieved through sieve of 4.75 mm to remove the finer 
particles. The recycled coarse aggregates were washed to remove dirt, dust etc. and collected for 
use in concrete mix .Natural aggregates used in this study were stone chips of 18 mm down grade 
collected from breaking of boulders from Bholaganj [5]. To evaluate and compare the mechanical 
property of recycled aggregate and natural aggregate several tests such as gradation of aggregates, 
aggregate crushing value (ACV), flakiness Index, Unit weight, Specific gravity and Water 
absorption were performed [6]. Six sets of concrete cylinders of 150 mm x 300 mm have been 
prepared for compressive strength test using 1:1.5:3 mix design ratio of which three sets are of 
natural aggregate concrete and rest of the three sets are of recycled aggregate concrete. 
Compressive strength of the specimens was tested at 14, 21 and 28 days apart. Finally 
conclusions and recommendations have been drawn based on test results. 
 
6. Tests, Results and Discussions 
 
6.1. Selection of Materials 
 
To select the appropriate materials for concrete to get better strength as well as workability 
following laboratory test has been recommended by ASTM. 
 Gradation of Coarse and fine aggregates 
 Aggregate crushing value (ACV) of coarse aggregate 
 Flakiness Index of coarse aggregate 
 Unit weight of coarse and fine aggregate 
 Specific gravity and water absorption of coarse and fine aggregate 
 Fineness modulus of fine aggregate 
 
To confirm the workability and expected strength following test for wet concrete is widely used 
at construction site 
 Workability test 
 Slump test 
 Compaction factor 
 Spreading table 
 Two point test 
 Air content 
 Setting time 
 Density 
 Yield 
 
6.2. Grading of Coarse aggregate 
 
To get the better workability as well as strength the coarse aggregate should confirm with the 
specified limit of ASTM, which shown in Table 1 & 2. If we follow the proper grading the 
proportion of paste and aggregate will be good combination which will give us better strength 
and workability. 
 
 
868 
 
Table 1 Grading of Natural Coarse Aggregate 
 
Sieve size 
(mm) 
Individual 
Weight 
Retained(gm) 
Cumulative 
Weight 
Retained(gm) 
Cumulative % 
retained 
Cumulative % 
Passing 
Specified Limit 
(% Passing) 
25 0 0 0 100 100 
20 118 118 2.58 97.42 90-100 
12.5 3093 67.71 67.71 32.29 0-55 
10 883 3976 87.13 12.87 5-20 
5 (#4) 487 4463 97.80 2.87 0-5 
0.075 (#200) 4522 4524 99.10 0.90 0-1.5 
Pan 41 - - - - 
Total 4563  
- 
- - - 
 
The cumulative percent passing is within the range of the specified limit. So, the test result is 
considered satisfactory. 
 
Table 2 Grading of Recycled Concrete as Coarse aggregate 
 
Sieve size 
(mm) 
Individual 
Weight 
Retained 
(gm) 
Cumulative 
Weight 
Retained (gm) 
Cumulative % 
retained 
Cumulative % 
Passing 
Specified 
Limit 
(% Passing) 
25 200 200 4.86 95.1 90-100 
20 310 510 14.71 85.29 90-100 
12.5 2920 3630 98.9 1.1 5-20 
Pan 38 - 
 
- 
 
- - 
Total 3468 - - - - 
 
The cumulative percent passing is within and near the range the range of the specified limit. So 
the test result is considered satisfactory. 
 
6.3. Laboratory Test Results of Coarse aggregates 
 
The results obtained from the Aggregate Crushing Value (ACV), Flakiness Index, Water 
absorption, Bulk Specific gravity (SSD condition), Bulk Specific gravity (Oven dry condition), 
Apparent Specific gravity and Unit weight for both NAC (Natural Aggregate Concrete) and RAC 
(Recycled Aggregate Concrete) are shown in Table 3 
 
 
869 
 
Table 3 Test Results for NAC (Natural Aggregate Concrete) and RAC (Recycled Aggregate 
Concrete) 
 
 NAC (Natural Aggregate Concrete) 
RAC (Recycled 
Aggregate Concrete) 
Recommended 
Value 
Aggregate Crushing 
Value (ACV) 25.00 % 28.93 % Less than 30% 
Flakiness Index 18.58 % 26.26 % Less than 30% 
Water absorption  0.574 % 1.626% Less than 1% 
Bulk Specific gravity 
(SSD condition)  2.67 2.551 2.6-2.8 
Bulk Specific gravity 
(Oven dry condition)  2.655 2.510 - 
Apparent Specific 
gravity  2.696 2.617 - 
Unit weight (gm/cc) 1.620 1.450 Near 1.60 gm/cc 
 
The aggregate crushing value gives a relative measure of the resistance of an aggregate to 
crushing under a gradually applied compressive load. The specified limit of aggregate crushing 
value should be within 30.In this study recycled aggregate is found to be relatively weaker than 
natural aggregate but both are within the specified limit. This study reveals that % of flaky 
particles in natural aggregate is 18.58% and in recycled aggregate it is 26.26%. The percentage of 
flaky particles should not exceed 30%. Both natural aggregate and recycled aggregate are within 
the specified limit. Specific gravity (SSD) of recycled aggregate is found to be 2.55 which is 
lower as compared to natural aggregate which is 2.67. For concrete cementing work the specified 
limit of specific gravity of natural coarse aggregate should be minimum 2.6 and water absorption 
should not exceed 1%. Since recycled aggregate from demolished concrete consist of crushed 
stone aggregate with old mortar adhering to it, water absorption is higher (1.62%) than that of 
natural coarse aggregate which is 0.574%. In this study unit wt of natural aggregate is found to be 
1.62 gm/cc where as unit wt of recycled coarse aggregate is 1.45 gm/cc both are near the 
specified limit of 1.6 gm/cc.  
 
6.4. Mix Design for Preparing Sample Cylinders 
 
On the basis of test data mix design data are calculated and used for preparing the cylinder. The 
results for preparing cylinder of RAC (Recycled Aggregate Concrete) are shown in Table 4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
870 
 
Table 4 Mix Design Data for 1 m³ concrete 
 
 
Concrete mixing, preparing cylinders, slump test, curing, testing cylinder samples and failure 
criterion are shown in Photo 1 to Photo 6. 
 
  
 
Photo 1 Concrete mixing 
 
 
Photo 2 Fresh Concrete is pouring 
in cylinder Moulds 
 
Absolute volume m³ 
Ta
rg
et
 S
tre
ng
th
 (p
si
) 
C
em
en
t c
on
te
nt
 (k
g)
 
W
at
er
 (k
g)
 
W
at
er
 C
em
en
t r
at
io
 
Vo
lu
m
e 
of
 C
oa
rs
e A
gg
re
ga
te
 (m
³) 
W
ei
gh
t o
f 
 C
oa
rs
e A
gg
re
ga
te
 (k
g)
 
C
em
en
t 
W
at
er
 
C
oa
rs
e A
gg
re
ga
te
 
A
ir 
Vo
lu
m
e 
w
ith
ou
t F
in
e A
gg
re
ga
te
 
Vo
lu
m
e 
of
 F
in
e A
gg
re
ga
te
 (m
³) 
W
ei
gh
t o
f F
in
e A
gg
re
ga
te
 (k
g)
 
U
ni
t w
t. 
of
 C
on
cr
et
e 
(k
g/
 m
³) 
30
00
 
30
0 
17
4 
0.
58
 
0.
65
 
10
53
 
0.
09
5 
0.
17
4 
0.
39
4 
0.
02
 
0.
68
3 
0.
31
7 
8.
9 
23
36
 
871 
 
  
 
Photo 3 Slump Test 
 
Photo 4 Cylinder Samples for curing 
 
  
 
Photo 5 Compressive Strength Test 
 
Photo 6 Combined failure of Cylinder 
 
6.5. Compressive Strength of RAC and NAC 
 
After Preparing 18 specimens of both natural aggregate concrete and recycled aggregate concrete 
with the desired mix design ratio, the samples have been removed from the cylinder mould and 
872 
 
immersed in a water tank for curing. Thirteen, twenty & twenty seven days later, six sets of 
specimens are taken out from the water tank for conducting the compressive strength test in the 
Strength of Materials Laboratory of Stamford University Bangladesh with the help of Universal 
Testing Machine. The test results of the 6 sets of concrete cylinders are shown in the Table 5, 6 & 
7. 
 
Table 5 Test Results for 14 days NAC (Natural Aggregate Concrete) and RAC (Recycled 
Aggregate Concrete) 
 
 
Table 6 Test Results for 21 days NAC (Natural Aggregate Concrete) and RAC (Recycled 
Aggregate Concrete) 
 
 
 
Ty
pe
 o
f C
on
cr
et
e 
Sl
.N
o.
 
A
ge
 o
n 
th
e 
da
te
 o
f 
 
te
st
 (d
ay
s)
 
Sa
m
pl
e 
id
en
tif
ic
at
io
n 
m
ar
k 
Sp
ec
im
en
 
ar
ea
 (s
q.
in
.) 
M
ax
im
um
 lo
ad
 (l
b)
 
C
ru
sh
in
g 
st
re
ng
th
 
(p
si
) 
A
vg
. C
ru
sh
in
g 
St
re
ng
th
 (p
si
) 
Ty
pe
 o
f f
ai
lu
re
 
1 14 PBMMP1 12.42 34527.6 2780 Combined 
2 14 PBMMP1 12.55 36395 2900 Combined 
NAC 
(Natural 
Aggregate 
Concrete) 3 14 PBMMP1 12.67 35856.1 2830 
2837 
Combined 
1 14 UTTARA-05 12.30 23247.0 1890 Combined 
2 14 UTTARA-05 12.42 22977.0 1850 Combined 
RAC 
(Recycled 
Aggregate 
Concrete) 3 14 UTTARA-05 12.42 22356.0 1800 
1847 
Combined 
Ty
pe
 o
f C
on
cr
et
e 
Sl
.N
o.
 
A
ge
 o
n 
th
e 
da
te
 o
f 
te
st
 (d
ay
s)
 
Sa
m
pl
e 
id
en
tif
ic
at
io
n 
m
ar
k 
Sp
ec
im
en
 
ar
ea
 (s
q.
in
.) 
M
ax
im
um
 lo
ad
 (l
b)
 
C
ru
sh
in
g 
st
re
ng
th
 
(p
si
) 
A
vg
. c
ru
sh
in
g 
St
re
ng
th
 (p
si
) 
Ty
pe
 o
f f
ai
lu
re
 
1 21 SYMYB1 12.30 44058.6 3582 Combined 
2 21 SYMYB1 12.42 45829.8 3690 Combined 
NAC 
(Natural 
Aggregate 
Concrete) 3 21 SYMYB1 12.42 45333.0 3650 
3641 
Combined 
1 21 UTTARA-05 12.30 29889.0 2430 Combined 
2 21 UTTARA-05 12.42 29559.6 2380 Combined 
RAC 
(Recycled 
Aggregate 
Concrete) 3 21 UTTARA-05 12.42 28566.0 2300 
2370 
Combined 
873 
 
Table 7 Test Results for 28 days NAC (Natural Aggregate Concrete) and RAC (Recycled 
Aggregate Concrete) 
 
 
From the obtained results it is found that the 14 day average Crushing strength of recycled 
concrete varied from normal concrete by 34.9% and whereas in the 21 day strength it varied by 
34.9% and in 28 day strength it varied by 34.78%. So overall, an average strength of recycled 
concrete varied from normal concrete by 34.86% that is 35%. The average strength variation of 
NAC (Natural Aggregate Concrete) and RAC (Recycled Aggregate Concrete) in 14, 21 and 28 
days are shown in Figure 1 
 
 
 
Figure 1 Compressive Strength of RAC and NAC in Different Days  
Ty
pe
 o
f C
on
cr
et
e 
Sl
.N
o.
 
A
ge
 o
n 
th
e 
da
te
 o
f 
 
te
st
 (d
ay
s)
 
Sa
m
pl
e 
id
en
tif
ic
at
io
n 
m
ar
k 
Sp
ec
im
en
 
ar
ea
  
(s
q.
in
.) 
M
ax
im
um
 lo
ad
 (l
b)
 
C
ru
sh
in
g 
st
re
ng
th
 
(p
si
) 
Av
g.
 c
ru
sh
in
g 
St
re
ng
th
 (p
si
) 
Ty
pe
 o
f f
ai
lu
re
 
1 28 BOPCB1 12.30 48954 3980 Combined 
2 28 BOPCB1 12.42 50922 4100 Combined 
NAC 
(Natural 
Aggregate 
Concrete) 3 28 BOPCB1 12.42 50301 4050 
4043 
Combined 
1 28 UTTARA-05 12.52 33804 2700 Combined 
2 28 UTTARA-05 12.65 33522 2650 Combined 
RAC 
(Recycled 
Aggregate 
Concrete) 3 28 UTTARA-05 12.80 32768 2560 
2637 
Combined 
874 
 
6.6. Cost Comparison of RAC and NAC 
 
In case of cost involved in preparation of 100 cubic ft concrete it is found that material cost of 
recycled aggregate concrete is BDT 14,595 whereas materials cost of natural aggregate concrete 
is BDT 21,155. The details cost of 100 cubic ft concrete is shown in Table 8. 
 
Table 8 Cost of 100 cubic ft Concrete 
 
NAC (Natural Aggregate 
Concrete) 
RAC (Recycled Aggregate 
Concrete) 
 
Cost in BDT Cost in BDT 
Cost of Materials 21,155.00 14,595.00 
Labour cost, equipment cost, 
mixing charges by plant and 
other costs  
2,994.00 2,994.00 
Total Cost per 100 cubic ft 
concrete 24,149.00 17,589.00 
 
From the obtained cost information, it is found that cost per cubic ft recycled aggregate concrete 
BDT 176 and that for natural aggregate concrete is BDT 242. Recycled aggregate concrete is 
about 27% cost effective than natural aggregate concrete. 
 
 
7. Conclusions and Recommendations 
 
Based on the above study following conclusions can be drawn. 
 
 Recycling and reuse of building waste have been found to be an appropriate solution to 
the problem of dumping of thousands ton of debris. 
 Recycling and reuse of construction waste also reduce disposal cost, reduce drainage 
congestion and conserve the natural recourses both aggregate and energy. 
 Recycled course aggregate may be more durable than virgin material because they have 
already gone through years of freeze thaw cycles. 
 Unit wt of recycled aggregate is less than natural aggregate which means less wt per 
cubic ft resulting in reduced material cost and overall project cost. 
 Recycled concrete as an aggregate meets almost all the standard and specifications set for 
the natural aggregates. Most of their mechanical property are compatible to each other. 
 The compressive strength of recycled aggregate concrete is 35% lower than natural 
aggregate concrete, so recycled concrete has proved advantageous was in pavement and 
road buildings in landscaping and in retaining walls. 
 If economic concern is considered, 27% cost can saved if one cubic feet (cft) of recycled 
concrete is used instead of one cft of natural aggregate concrete. 
 Use of recycled aggregate concrete proves to be a valuable building material in technical 
and environmental aspect as well as in economical aspect by keeping construction cost 
low. 
 
875 
 
One of the Major challenges of our present society is protection of environment. Some of the 
important elements in this respect are reduction of consumption of energy and natural raw 
materials and consumption of waste materials. The use of recycled aggregate from construction 
and demolition waste is showing prospective application in construction as an alternative to 
natural aggregates. It conserves natural resources and reduces the space required for landfill 
disposal. This recycled concrete proves itself as environment friendly construction materials 
 
Recycling concrete is becoming as increasingly popular way to utilize aggregate left behind when 
structures or roadways are demolished. In the past that rubble was disposed of in landfills, but 
with more attention being paid to environmental concerns concrete recycling allows reuse of the 
rubble also keeping construction cost down. However more research and initiation of pilot project 
for application of recycled aggregate concrete is needed for modification of our design code 
specification and procedure for use of recycled aggregate concrete.   
 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
The authors express their sincere appreciation and heartiest thanks to Mahfuzur Rahman, Md. 
Ripon Mia & Md. Shajadul Islam, students of Department of in Civil Engineering of Stamford 
University Bangladesh for their unconditional co-operation and help.  
 
 
References 
 
1.Abbas, A., Fathifazl,G., Isgor,O.B., Razaqpur,A.G., Fournier, B. and Foo, S.,(2006). 
Environmental benefits of green concrete .Climate change conference ,Ottawa ,Canada. 
2.Topcu, I. B. and Sengel, S., (2004). Properties of concretes produced with waste concrete 
aggregate. Cement and concrete research, V.34, No.8:1307-1312. 
3.Hansen,T. C., (1992) . Recycling of demolished concrete and masonry. Report No. 6, RILEM, 
E&FN Spon: 336. 
4.Maruyama,L. Sogo, M., Sogabe, T.,Sato, R. and Kawai,K.(2004).Flexural properties of 
reinforced recycled concrete beams. Conference on the use of recycled materials in building 
and structures, Barcelona, Spain.: pp 526-535 
5.ACI Committee 211,(1991).Standard practice for selecting proportions for normal, 
heavyweight and mass concrete. American Concrete Institute, Farmington Hills ,MI. 
6.ASTM C127-01, (2001). Standard test method for density, relative density and absorption of 
course aggregate. ASTM International, West Conshohocken. 
7.Abbas A., Fathifazl, G.,Isgor, O.B., Razaqpur, A.G., Fournier, B. and Foo,S., (2008). Proposed 
method for determining the residual mortar content of recycled concrete aggragate. Journal of 
ASTM International,V.5,No.1, pp12. 
8.Neville, A.M , (1995). Properties of concrete, Fourth edition, Longman Group Limited. 
 
 
 
876 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
EVALUATION OF THE EFFECTS OF TRAFFIC NOISE AT SELECTED LOCATIONS 
OF DHAKA AND SYLHET CITY 
 
 
M  Aktarul Islam Chowdhury1, M Saiful Islam2 and Shamsun Nahar3.  
 
 
ABSTRACT: No one on earth can escape the sounds of noise - an unwanted, disturbing sound. 
Noise, a byproduct of increase in magnitude and severity because of population growth, 
urbanization, industrialization and motorization and the associated growth in the use of 
increasingly powerful, varied, and highly mobile sources of noise, is increasingly recognized as 
an environmental nuisance that affects human health and wellbeing. The potential health effects 
of noise pollution are numerous, pervasive, persistent, and medically and socially significant. 
Specifically traffic noise on existing urban road-ways depending on the number of the vehicles in 
the traffic train of the city lowers the quality of life and property values for persons residing near 
the urban areas. Recently noise pollution is being identified as a new environmental threat to the 
world community. Now-a-days, Dhaka, the capital city of Bangladesh is the industry of noise 
pollution and Sylhet is also becoming on. Total population of Dhaka city is 1,67,29,000 while of 
Sylhet city is 9,80,700. Increasing rate of population in Sylhet is 2.1% which is maximum overall 
in the country. Total number of motor vehicles in Dhaka city is 643003 where as in Sylhet city is 
about 243825. For this study, noise levels of major intersections of Roads of Sylhet city such as 
Zinda bazar, Amdarkhana point, Couhatta point, Kodomtoli bus stand and Kumargoan bus stand 
and some important places of Dhaka city such as Saidabad, Gulistan, Motijil, Gabtoli, 
Mohakhali. Volume of vehicle at intersections was also measured. The sound levels were 
measured at 71 points of 10 important locations between 8a.m. and 8p.m. in the city. The results 
indicate high noise levels, surpassing on many occasions to the prescribed noise levels. Overall 
minimum and maximum noise levels for the main roads are 72.2 decible (dB) and 115.5 dB. Bus 
stops had minimum and maximum noise levels were 72.9 dB and 115.5dB. At road intersections, 
minimum and maximum sound levels were 72.1 dB and 115.2 dB. The effects of noise pollution 
are hearing loss is 15%, headache is 17%, vomiting is 5%, weakness is 3%, concentration disturb 
is 20%, feeling discomfort is 40 %. At this situation, to control the noise level, adequate steps 
should need to be taken by the respective authority as soon as possible and publics should be 
aware of the harmful effects of the noise pollution, otherwise it will become a new environmental 
disaster to the citizen of Dhaka and Sylhet city. 
 
  
 
                                                        
1Professor, CEE Department, SUST, Sylhet, Bangladesh. aic_cee@yahoo.com  
2Research Student, CEE Department, SUST, Bangladesh, faruq.cee@gmail.com 
3Research Student, CEE Department, SUST, Bangladesh. shams_rupa@yahoo.com 
 
877 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Noise pollution is a serious and neglected issue in Dhaka, Sylhet and throughout Bangladesh.,  
Noise has a significant impact on the quality of life, and in that sense it is a health problem in 
accordance with the World Health Organization's (WHO) definition of health. WHO's definition 
of health includes total physical and mental well-being, as well as the absence of disease. (Suess, 
1973).1 About five to seven percent of the patients admitted to the BSMMU due to the effect of 
sound pollution. Disturbances created by noise may cause hypertension, headache, indigestion, 
peptic ulcer, etc (OECD, 1995).2We are responsible for generating sounds more than we persist. 
From that point, the issue of ‘noise pollution’ comes into being. The word Noise comes from the 
Latin word ‘Nausea’ which is referred to ‘Sea sickness’.3Noise is having a variety of harmful 
effect over the society. Noise pollution can cause annoyance and aggression, hypertension, high 
stress levels, tinnitus, hearing loss, sleep disturbances, and other harmful effects.4Noise pollution 
is measured in decibels (dB). Noise is recognized as a controllable pollutant that can yield to 
abatement technology. Noise produces direct and cumulative adverse effects that impair health 
and that degrade residential, social, working, and learning environments with corresponding real 
(economic) and intangible (well-being) losses. It interferes with sleep, concentration, 
communication, and recreation.5Noise pollution is greatly felt in big cities and emergent towns. 
In Bangladesh, its capital Dhaka is one of the megacities which are until expanding and Sylhet is 
a fast growing city. These two cities are chosen for noise pollution study. Dhaka, having a very 
convenient geographic position, attract people to stay there as permanent resident and now 
suffers being over-populated. The Sylhet carries each criteria of a rising city. The city is 
expanding all around. New roads are be constructed, new apartment houses, schools and colleges, 
shopping malls are seen to be build and are the signs of increasing population. The number of 
vehicle are getting larger with time, crowd is now an obvious scenario of the city. Half of the 
residents in the Bangladeshi capital Dhaka will be losing their hearing capacity by 30 decibels in 
the next 20 years, if immediate steps are not taken to control noise pollution here.6Traffic related 
noise pollution accounts for nearly two-third of the total noise pollution in an urban area. Traffic 
noise on existing urban road-ways lowers the quality of life and property values for person 
residing in vicinity of these urban areas. Thus, the study of road traffic noise in big cities is an 
important issue. Due to limited availability of land resources and finances, many important roads 
are in the commercial areas. Hence there will be some adverse and environmental effects 
including psychological and physiological effects to those living to proximity of these areas. 
Noise pollution is greatly felt in big cities and emergent towns. The number of vehicles is getting 
larger with time; crowd is now an obvious scenario of the city. This thesis is done with the 
objectives are to assess the noise level at various intersections of Dhaka and Sylhet city, to assess 
the impacts on exposures by survey and to propose suitable noise control measures. 
 
2. Methodology 
 
For assessment of road traffic noise due to vehicular movement the sampling, analysis and 
interpretation tools were selected to give most realistic results. All the measurements were made 
on “A-weighting” scale.  Noise levels have been measured by a noise level meter of model NL-
04. During each two hourly interval, sound level has been measured for ten minutes. The average 
values of these measurements have been recorded as the sound level of the corresponding 
location at a specific time. The integrating sound level meter NL-04 allows not only conventional 
878 
 
sound pressure level measurement, but also in-corporate processing functions which make it 
possible to determine: L10, L50, L90, Laeq, Lae, Lmax. All the measurement is done in decibel (dB) 
units. A questionnaire survey has been conducted for determining the effect of noise on traffic 
policemen, road side business men and driver. There survey is conducted on 110 people in Dhaka 
and 90 people in Sylhet city. 
 
2.1  Sampling Location 
The sampling points are selected on the basis of importance of the area, traffic volume and the 
quantity of people can be subjected to direct noise pollution.  The name of the sampling points of 
this study area wchich are most important intersections such as Syedabad, Gulistan, Motijheeel, 
Mohakhali, Gabtuli of Dhaka city and Kodomtoli Bus Stand, Bondor, Zindabazar, Chuhatta, 
Amberkhana, Kumargaon Bus stand has been selected of Sylhet city. Within these intersections, 
from 71 points noise data were collected. 
 
2.2   Sampling Frequency 
 
Noise level is measured in each of the sampling location in working days during a)8 am to 10 am 
b) 10 am to12 pm c) 12 pm to 2 pm d)2 pm to 4 pm e) 4 pm to 6 pm f) 6 pm to 8 pm.  
 
3. Result and discussion 
 
3.1 Effects of sound pollution, respond by age and noise reducing path 
 
Noise effects on the people of Dhaka and Sylhet is shown in Figure 1 where HP, H, V, W, CD & 
D denote hearing problem, headache, vomiting, people weakness, concentration disturbs & 
discomforts. 
 
  
Dhaka 
 
Sylhet 
 
Figure 1: Public opinion about noise effect 
 
3.2  Awareness about sound pollution 
 
Awareness about noise pollution of Dhaka and Sylhet city is shown in Figure 2 where K.F, F. not 
U, N.H denote known and feel, feel but not understand & never heard. 
 
879 
 
 
Dhaka 
 
Sylhet 
 
Figure 2: Awareness about noise pollution 
 
3.3  Respond on sound pollution based on age 
 
Among the 110 and 90 people in Dhaka and Sylhet city, the respond of these people depends on 
age is shown in Figure 3 where A, B, C, D denote 14-19 aged, 20-29 aged, 30-39 aged & 40-49 
aged. 
 
 
Dhaka 
 
Sylhet 
 
Figure 3: Respondents by age 
3.4  Way of reduce sound pollution 
 
There was almost agreement among the general public about the need to raise awareness (A.), 
vehicle design (V.D), stop horn (S.H), road design (R.D) and applying law (L.A) to reduce sound 
pollution that is shown in Figure 4.  
 
 
Dhaka 
 
Sylhet 
 
Figure 4: Way of reduce sound pollution 
880 
 
 3.5  Noise level at different place in different time 
 
Noise level at different place in different time of Dhaka and Sylhet city was measured by using 
noise meter. The maximum sound level was found at syedabad and gabtuli in Dhaka. The 
maximum sound level was found at amberkhana in Sylhet. Noise levels were shown in Figure 5. 
 
      Locations T.I 
S. M. Gu. M. Ga. 
L.U B.S C. C. B.S. B.S 
N 84.5 83.4 84.6 80.2 83.4 
O 85.8 82.6 85.2 82.5 84.1 
P 83.4 82.1 84.7 81.6 83.5 
Q 84.6 82.8 83.6 80.5 83.8 
R 85.2 83.8 85.8 81.3 84.2 
S 84.8 82.8 83.8 80.8 82.5 
 
Dhaka 
Legend: 
S=Syedabad; M=Motijheel; 
Gu=Gulistan; M=Mohakhali; 
Ga=Gabtuli 
C=Commercial 
 
  Locations T.I 
Ku.B.S A. C. Z. B. Ko.B.S 
L.U B.S C. C. C. C. B.S 
N 80.2 82.5 79.5 80.8 81.2 81.1 
O 81.4 81.2 80.2 81.4 82.5 82.5 
P 80.8 82.8 81.6 81.5 81.6 81.9 
Q 82.2 80.4 79.2 80.5 82.6 81.6 
R 81.4 83.5 80.5 81.8 81.4 82.5 
S 80.2 84.8 81.2 80.6 82.1 81.3 
 
Sylhet 
Legend: 
T.I=Time interval, L.U=Land use, N=8am-10am, 
O=10am-12pm, P=12pm-2pm, Q=2pm-4pm, R= 
4pm-6pm, S=6pm-8pm. B.S=Bus Stand, 
C=Commercial; Ku.B.S=Kumargoan Bus Stand; 
A=Amberkhana; C=Chowhatta; Z=Zindabazar; 
B=Bondor; Ko.B.S=Kodomtoli Bus Stand.  
 
 
Figure 5: Noise Levels (dBA), Laeq, at Various Locations 
 
3.2 Sound level at different intersections shown in below: 
 
Comparison of sound level at different intersection in Dhaka and Sylhet city is shown in below: 
From Figure 6, we can see that, the maximum sound level (85.8 dBA) in Saidabad between 
different bus stations. 
 
881 
 
 
 
Figure 6: Sound level at different bus station of Dhaka & Sylhet city. 
 
From Figure 7, we can see that, the maximum sound level (85.2 dBA) in Gulistan between the 
commercial places. 
 
 
Figure 7: Sound level at different commercial places of Dhaka & Sylhet city. 
From Figure 8, we can see that, the maximum sound level (85.8 dBA) in Saidabad between the 
different places of Dhaka city. 
 
882 
 
 
Figure 8: Sound level at different places of Dhaka city. 
From Figure 9, we can see that, the maximum sound level (84.8 dBA) in Amberkhana between 
the different places of Sylhet city. 
 
 
Figure 9: Sound level at different places of Sylhet city. 
 
Table 1 shows the noise level of commercial areas from where it is found that average equivalent 
level of sound exceed standard level not only that NPL at 6pm-8pm in case of sylhet, reach up to 
115.6dB which may cause permanent loss of hearing, change of pulse rate as well as vomiting for 
the human being who are exposed in these areas. 
 
 
 
883 
 
Table 1: Comparison of Noise Level in Commercial area of Dhaka and Sylhet city 
Place Maximum 
level of  
Laeq Lmax NPL 
8am-10am 84.6 105.2 96.94 
10am-12pm 85.2 100.3 94.92 
12pm-2pm 84.7 104.5 92.77 
2pm-4pm 83.6 110.6 93.68 
4pm-6pm 85.8 112.5 98.53 
 
 
 
Dhaka 
6pm-8pm 83.8 104.4 95.8 
8am-10am 82.5 102.5 94.00 
10am-12pm 81.2 100.6 91.60 
12pm-2pm 82.8 95.5 95.12 
2pm-4pm 80.4 102.4 89.61 
4pm-6pm 83.5 110.2 97.23 
 
 
 
Sylhet 
6pm-8pm 84.8 115.2 100.30 
Taken as Standard as like 
as commercial areas 
70 70 70 
 
In contrast, Dhaka shows much higher sound level at whole day long for all categories of sound. 
At morning and evening noise level is largest in both of the cities. Whereas DOE set maximum 
acceptable sound level for commercial area as 70 dB, the violation of rule is visible but no law is 
enforced against this violation. 
From the table 2 which is shown below, it can be said that comparatively the bus stations of 
Dhaka are noisier than sylhet. Whole over the day, the sound level remains a small deflection. 
From my analysis, I have found that, sound have deflection with level. 
Table 2: Comparison of Sound level in Bus Station Area of Dhaka and Sylhet city  
Place Maximum 
level of  
Laeq Lmax NPL 
8am-10am   84.5 105.1 98.81 
10am-12pm 85.8 112.4 101.11 
12pm-2pm 83.4 108.5 95.72 
2pm-4pm 84.6 115.4 97.44 
4pm-6pm 85.2 115.5 100.51 
 
 
 
Dhaka 
6pm-8pm 84.8 108.6 98.72 
8am-10am 81.1 102.3 90.31 
10am-12pm 82.5 105.4 93.69 
12pm-2pm 81.9 101.3 91.84 
2pm-4pm 81.6 108.5 91.70 
4pm-6pm 82.5 95.7 93.10 
 
 
 
Sylhet 
6pm-8pm 81.3 106.4 93.82 
Taken as Standard as like 
as commercial areas 
70 70 70 
884 
 
There is no acceptable limit set for Bus stations, if it is considered as commercial area, the noise 
level should be limit within 70 dB. There are some residential hotels suited at or near by the bus 
stations in both cities so extra precautions are required for external or internal constructions of 
those hotels to support comfortable rest for the client. There is need a law to build a new bus 
station and this should be planned and perfectly designed. 
3.3 Noise Parameters near road at different intersection 
 
Typical values of the noise parameters (NPL, TNI, NC) described earlier are shown in table for 
some particular locations in Dhaka and Sylhet city. The following table shows the different 
parameters of noise level at various intersections. 
 
Table 3: Noise Parameters at different intersection (Dhaka) 
 
Location NC TNI NPL 
Sydabad 14.7 101.7 100.21 
Motijheel 13.1 94.9 96.77 
Gulistan 13.3 95.7 97.95 
Mohakhali 10.7 85.3 93.21 
Gabtuli 14.3 99.4 99.00 
 
Table 4: Noise Parameters at different intersection (Sylhet) 
 
Location NC TNI NPL 
Kumargoan Bus Stand 12.8 94.00 96.33 
Amberkhana 10.6 84.9 92.77 
Chowhatta 10.6 84.9 92.57 
Zindabazar 10.8 85.1 92.34 
Bondor 14.1 98.5 95.61 
Kodomtali Bus Stand 10.7 84.9 93.40 
 
3.5 Relation between Traffic Volume and the Noise level 
As we observed that traffic is the main source of noise. Traffic volume and speed of the vehicle 
affect the noise level. As the urbanization process continuing motorized vehicles flow increases. 
The condition of traffic volume of Dhaka and Sylhet city on some major locations is shown 
below: As we plot the traffic versus noise level graph it shows the linear relationship. Noise level 
increases when the traffic volume increases. The following figure gives the relationship. For 
rapid urbanization process traffic increase at the same rate as it is the one of the major need of 
people. So it can be said that in future traffic will be increased at same rate. The following figure 
885 
 
helps us to predict the future situation of noise level corresponding to traffic. The Figures 10 & 
11 also shows a good correlation (for Dhaka R2 = 0.859, for Sylhet R2 = 0.888). 
 
 
Figure 10: Variation of Noise Level with Traffic  
 
Figure 11: Variation of Noise Level with Traffic 
4. Recommendation 
 
Supply ear protector by the government to traffic police. Zero horn traffic system, should be 
implementing. Should be stop hydraulic horn. In traffic jam, don’t use horn. Increase the amount 
of punishment (taka) to break the traffic rule. Buffer zones should be provided between road and 
the households to provide a distance over which noise can be attenuated. The engineers should 
design the geometric features in a way to control noise. Not allow unfit vehicles to circulate; 
886 
 
create a good law about noise pollution, and inform the public about it; Work directly with 
drivers to motivate them to honk less; Improve traffic conditions; Educate drivers and the general 
public about the problem of noise pollution, and what they can do to reduce it. Most of the people 
are not aware about the noise pollution. At first awareness program should be carried out to know 
the people about noise. It will help to control noise pollution at the receptor site. Place larger 
signs banning honking in quiet zones. Tree plantation (as barrier) can reduce the noise. So tree 
plantation program should be adopted to reduce the noise level. 
 
5. Conclusions 
 
This study is showing that in the commercial areas and bus stations are much higher than the 
acceptable limit. The study also reveals the existing sound pollution status of Dhaka and Sylhet 
city. The whole scenario is clamorous. There is hardly any place in both cities which can be 
suited to DOE acceptable limit. In Sylhet, Bondor Bazar is dominantly noisy commercial area 
having all of the parameter highest. No dominating silent area is found in Sylhet as well. The 
maximum sound, LA max is observed 115.2 dB at Amberkhana area and second highest in 
Kodomtali bus stand (108.5 dB) as well as Bondor and Zindabazar both have 108.2 dB and 100.2 
dB during experiment. During the experiment maximum noise level, LA max reaches above 100 
dB at all sampling locations in both of the cities. In Dhaka, the maximum noise level, LA max 
from motorized vehicles is observed to be 115.5 dB at Saidabad bus terminal, 110.2 dB at 
Mohakhali and 112.1 dB at Gabtuli during this time period. In Sylhet, the maximum noise level 
LA max from motorized vehicles reaches up to 108.5 dB at Kadamtali bus station and 
Kumargaon it is observed 105.5 dB. There is no acceptable limit set for bus station. If it is 
considered as commercial area, its maximum acceptable limit should be 70 dB. From the chart of 
bus station, it can be observed that the energy equivalent continuous noise level,   LA eq is ranges 
from 82 dB in Dhaka and Sylhet during experiment. The maximum sound level 115.5 dB in 
Dhaka and Sylhet is 115.2 dB observed. At all point commonly each noise parameter is highest. 
LAeq, Lnp each exhibits a threshold of existing sound pollution. It is observed that most of the 
maximum high sound level occurs during evening time from 6 pm to 8 pm but some places is 
different. This time may be termed as vulnerable for sound pollution. In brief, the results of the 
study show that the level of sound pollution in both Dhaka and Sylhet city far exceeds the 
acceptable limits set by the Department of Environment, Bangladesh. Every densely populated 
area is posing noise induced health hazard and a large number of people are living at risk. For the 
health, sanity, and well-being of the population, and for the future of our children, it is time that 
we all take this problem seriously, and begin implementing solutions. So the respective authority 
should take effective measures to reduce noise level as soon as possible in Dhaka and Sylhet city.  
 
Acknowledgement 
 
The authors would like to thank the Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering of 
Shahjalal University of Science and Technology. The authors would also like to thank the traffic 
polices, bus drivers and road side business men for their kind mutual aid who are the main 
exaggerated by sound pollution. 
 
 
 
 
887 
 
Referrences 
 
Mahadi, M, “Noise Pollution in Dhaka City”, Department of Environmental Science. 
Ahmed, k. (1998), “A Study on Noise pollution in Dhaka city”, Department of Environment, 
Bangladesh. 
Senate Public Works Committee, Noise Pollution and Abatement Act of 1972, S. Rep. No. 1160, 
92nd Cong. 2nd session.   
S. Rosen and P. Olin, Hearing Loss and Coronary Heart Disease, Archives of Otolaryngology, 
82:236 (1965].  
Goines, Lisa; Hagler, Louis [2007]. “Noise pollution: a modern plague”   
Dr. A K M Kafiluddin [2004]. “Article: Noise pollution threatens health of Dhaka resident. 
S. P. Singal, “Noise Pollution and Control Strategy”, Alpha Science International, 2005 
Basak, S. R. (2007) “Assessment of Noise pollution in Vulnerable Hospital Sites of 
Sylhet City” Undergraduate Thesis, Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, 
SUST, Sylhet. 
Ahmed, k. (1998), “A Study on Noise pollution in Dhaka city”, Department of 
Environment, Bangladesh. 
Ahmed, M. Y. (2000), “Bangladesh Environment 2000”, (Bangladesh Poribesh Andolon) 
Alam, J. B., Rauf, A.F.M.A. and Ahmed, M.F. (2001), “Traffic induced noise pollution 
in Dhaka city”, Journal of Civil Engineering, The institute of Engineers, Bangladesh. 
C. M. Harris, “Hand Book of noise control”, McGrawHill, USA, 1979. 
 
 
 
 
888 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
CHAR FORMATION PROCESS AND LIVELIHOOD CHARACTERISTICS OF CHAR 
DWELLERS OF ALLUVIAL RIVER IN BANGLADESH 
 
 
Mohammad Arifur Rahman1 and Md. Munsur Rahman2 
 
 
ABSTRACT: The present study tries to identify consolidate the formation and growth of sand 
bars in alluvial river by the literature review works. It also focuses the livelihood resources 
generation process and livelihood practices of the char dwellers. The research has been conducted 
through interdisciplinary approach. Different socio technical tools are used to analyze the 
problem. Local people’s participation in the research process has ensured by using Participatory 
Rural Appraisal (PRA) tools. The channel patterns of alluvial rivers have been classified as 
straight, meandering and braided (Leopold and Wolman, 1957). Callander (1969) and Parker 
(1976) developed a two-dimensional flow model to explain the origin of meandering. They treat 
the meandering or braiding tendencies of straight channels as a stability problem. Fredsoe (1978) 
recommends the stability criteria as: B/h0 <8 (straight); B/h0 >60 (braiding).The attached char 
like Char Konabari, about 60 percent people are engaged in handloom activities as labor as their 
main source of livelihood. Agriculture is the second highest and about 20 percent people are 
engaged in such practice; about four percent people are engaged in small business (broker, small 
retailer) and rests others are engaged in day labor activities and others like van driver etc. In the 
island char like Dakshin Boro-char, about 60% and 30% people are agricultural farmer and 
fishermen. On-farm activities are dominant in Dakshin Boro-char. On the other hand both in off-
farming and on-faring activities are equal in attached char. 
 
Keywords: Char Livelihood, Alluvial River, Interdisciplinary Approach, Char Formation 
Processes, PRA tools. 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
1.1. Background 
 
The vegetated landmasses within the riverbanks of Bangladesh, which are commonly known as 
chars, have long been inhabited by a large number of people. ISPAN (1995) noted that island 
chars are defined as land that, even in dry season, can be reached from the mainland only by 
crossing a main channel. Attached chars are accessible from the main land without crossing a 
                                                        
1PhD Student, Institute of Water and Flood Management, Bangladesh University of Engineering and 
Technology, Dhaka, Bangladesh. arif_es36@yahoo.co.uk   
2Professor, Institute of Water and Flood Management, Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technolo
gy, Dhaka, Bangladesh. mmrahman@iwfm.buet.ac.bd  
889 
 
main channel during the dry season (crossing lesser channels may be required), yet is inundated 
or surrounded by water during the peak of a ‘normal’ flood shown in Figure 1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Char Classification. 
 
   In the Brahmaputra River, Bristow (1987) found that exposed new mid-channel bars 
comprised 13% of deposits by area over a six year period, while lateral accretion to the bank and 
mid- channel bars amounted to 49%, upstream and downstream accretion were 7.5% and 15.5% 
respectively and the remaining 15% was formed through channel abandonment. The Jamuna is 
one of the largest braided rivers in the world. Three levels of bars are also present in the Jamuna 
River: island char, braid bar and very low level bar associated with dune (Thorne et al., 1993; 
Hossain et al., 2000).When a char emerges, it consists of sand of approximately the same 
coarseness as the bed material of the river reach. However, at the lee side of a medial or point bar, 
fine materials would deposit. When the bar elevation reaches close to average flood levels, a 
layer of silt and clay is deposited over the sand layer, facilitating the development of vegetated 
islands named as chars. As the chars grow older, their levels increase and attain the height of the 
adjacent floodplains. This process might be interrupted by subsequent lateral erosion of the chars 
(Sarker et. al, 2003).Bristow 1987; Thorne et al. 1993 have established that the elevations of 
active sand bars are less than those of established chars. This is also evident from the fact that the 
area of sand visible in a low-flow satellite image is sensitive to the water level on the date of 
image, whereas the visible area of established char land is insensitive. The change from 'sand' or 
'land' to water at a given pixel between two consecutive images (which could result from either 
char destruction or vertical accretion), is always taken to represent char destruction. Similarly, 
change from 'sand' to 'land' (which could result from either the conversion of a bar to a char 
through sedimentation, or the re-establishment of vegetation or cultivation on the sediment-
covered surface of an existing char), is always taken to represent the creation of a new char area. 
Therefore, areas classified as sand were excluded from the procedure relating elevation to char 
age.A distinction should be made between island chars, which are surrounded by water year-
round and attached chars, which are connected to the mainland under normal flow conditions. 
The formation process and characteristics of these chars are different in braided and meandering 
890 
 
rivers, while within a river the char characteristics may differ in a lengthwise direction. Generally, 
chars upstream consist of coarser materials compared to those downstream. Height of the chars 
above low or average water levels would depend on the annual water level variations.In a braided 
river the formation of an island char would deflect the river flow to both sides, tending to widen 
the river through bank erosion. This process of widening of the river and sediments becoming 
available from the eroding banks would enhance the process of continued bar-building. Clusters 
of bars could be formed that eventually merge to form larger and more permanent island chars. At 
the downstream end of such an island cluster the river flow converges, scouring the bed to 
produce deeper and narrower channels. Over time, there develops a mature braided river 
consisting of relatively long and wide reaches separated by shorter and narrower reaches. 
Numerous clusters of island chars and anabranches are found within the relatively long and wide 
reaches of the river. In the shorter and narrower reaches, the flows usually converge to form a 
node. In the Jamuna River, the spacing of the clusters of island char has increased over the years. 
The spacing at present is between 20 and 30 km. (ISPAN, 1995).Recently, the width of the char-
free nodal reaches in the Jamuna River seems to be increasing. They are no longer as well 
defined as they were thirty years ago (Colman, 1969). As the river has widened, island chars have 
also widened, while the actual width of the water surface has remained almost constant. 
Consequently, there has been a net loss of floodplain area and a gain in sand and char area. 
Though the total mass balance seems to be in equilibrium, a qualitative change occurs as fine 
grains like silt and clay particles are being washed away from the floodplain, while relatively 
course materials like fine sand are being deposited on the sandbars and chars. Widening of a river 
is thus associated with an increased supply of sediments or coarse materials from upstream, 
which the river is unable to transport. When the river bed is raised due to deposition of sediments, 
the river maintains its flow area by eroding fine materials from the adjacent floodplains.In a 
meandering river, two types of reaches exist: bends and crossing. Meandering bends are always 
associated with point bars. Point bars are formed through secondary currents, which erode the 
outer bank of a meandering bend and deposit the sediments in the inner bend. The topography of 
this type of chars has a typical pattern; it is elevated at the upstream part of the inner bend and 
gradually slopes down in the downstream and from the bank towards the river. Points bars as 
attached bars in a meandering rivers are different from attached bars in a braided river. In these 
rivers attached char develop from an island char by the abandonment of an anabranch near the 
floodplain. Attached chars in braided rivers would thus have the same characteristics as a medial 
bar; in the sense that these will be elevated at the tip of the bar, with the slope gradually declining 
in the downstream and toward each of the flanks.Being both wandering rivers, the Ganges and 
Padma have similar char formation processes. In these rivers, large sweeping meandering bend 
produce point bars. In locations where chute channels remain active in both the dry and wet 
seasons, island char are also created. After disappearance of the chute channels, such island chars 
become attached chars. In the braided reaches medial bars emerge as island chars, which may 
become attached chars if the channel reach becomes meandering or the anabranch near the 
floodplain is abandoned. Given this order of development, it is likely that in the wandering rivers 
the attached chars are older than the island chars. This is confirmed by the fact that the area 
flooded is lower in the attached chars compared to the island chars. 
 
 
 
 
 
891 
 
2. Methodology 
 
These are typed in bold, upper- and lower-case letters, with two lines space above the heading, 
and one line space below. The text after the heading begins at the left-hand margin (i.e., it is not 
indented as for new paragraph). 
   The research has been conducted through interdisciplinary approach. Different socio technical 
tools are used to analyze the problem. Local people’s participation in the research process has 
ensured by using Participatory Rural Appraisal (PRA) tools like Discussion tools (Focus Group 
Discussion - FGD, Semi Structure Interview), Mapping Tools (Resource mapping, Transect walk), 
Diagramming tools (Seasonal Calendar). This interdisciplinary approach enables the researcher to 
gain in-depth understanding of the issues raised through the PRA practices. PRA enables rural 
people to share, enhance and analyze their knowledge of life and conditions, to plan and to act 
(Chambers, 2002). For the study several FGD is conducted with agricultural farmer, fishermen 
and handloam worker of different age group (Group 1: Age 18-30 years, Group 2: Age 31-45 
years, Group 3: Age 46-60 years). Secondary data has been consolidated by the literature review 
works in order to make a rationale for the formation and growth of sand bars in braided and 
meandering rivers.In addition to this, a formal semi-structure questionnaire is designed in an easy 
way that is relevant to the resource and livelihoods practices of the char dwellers for 
questionnaire survey. Simple random technique has been applied as sampling procedure. Simple 
Random Sampling from a finite population refers to that method of sample selection, which gives 
each possible sample combination an equal probability of being picked up and each item in the 
entire population to have an equal chance of being included in the sample (Kothari, 1996).  
   The per capita income noted that the total income divided the total population of the specific 
region. Hence, the per capita income of a char is calculated the following equation:  
 
Per capita Income=Total Income from different occupation / Total Population of the specific char. 
 
 
2.1. The Study Area 
 
The study area is selected on the basis of stability of the char (less stable char, stable char) as well 
as location of the char (attached char and within the river char). Some additional selection criteria 
also considered; such as local livelihood pattern and alternative options, household consistency, 
agricultural concentration, communication and community responsiveness.  
   The char Konabari of Rajapur union under Belkuchi Upazila, Sirajganj district and Dakshin 
Boro-char of Eklashpur union under Uttar Matlab, Chandpur district is selected for the present 
study. The char Konabari is a less stable char and emerged during 1998 flood. However, the 
Dakshin Boro-char is a stable char and emerged in the year 1970. The char Konabari is situated 
on the eastern side of the branch channel of Jamuna River and the Dakshin Boro-char is placed 
on the confluence of Padma-Meghna are shown in Figure 2.  
892 
 
 
Figure 2: Location of the Study Area. 
 
 
3. Channel Morphology 
 
Rivers are the channel through which water flows from their catchment area to the sea. Generally 
rivers carry a mixture of water and sediments. A river is shaped by the flow, volume, quantity and 
character of the sediment and the character or composition of the bed and bank materials 
(Leopold et al., 1964). Rivers are found in different forms and geometries. Geomorphological 
classifications of channel type have established qualitative links between channel process, form 
and stability. Leopold and Wolman (1957) classified rivers as straight, meandering and braided. 
   The floodplain topography, bed sediments, bank materials and riparian vegetation produces 
the characteristic channel morphology of an alluvial stream. Geomorphological classification of 
channel type have established qualitative links between channel process, from and stability. 
893 
 
Leopold and Wolman (1957) undertook a detailed examination of river form.  He concluded that 
natural channels from a continuous spectrum of patterns from straight to braided systems. An 
attempt was made to discriminate between meandering and braiding on the basis of formative 
discharge and channel slope.From the laboratory study, Schumm and Khan (1972) represent 
straight, meandering and braided in terms of sinuosity versus valley slope. Schumm (1977) 
proposed a more useful approach to classify channel type from straight, through meandering to 
braided channels with no abrupt breaks in between (Figure 3). While classifying the channel type, 
there is a continuum of planform patterns together with the use of an examination of the 
geomorphological features displayed by the channel. He shows a general relationship between 
sediment load, channel stability and channel form. 
 
 
3.1. Channel form and processes 
 
Channels with fine sediment moving in suspension and highly erosion-resistant boundary 
materials are relatively the most stable and follow straight and slightly sinuous courses (Type 1 
and 2 in Figure 3). Such channels are often effectively confined by their bank materials and 
display rates of lateral shifting and planform evolution that are slow, or imperceptible. Leopold 
and Wolman (1957) classified a stream as straight if its sinuosity (ratio of channel length to valley 
length) was less than 1.1, between 1.1 and 1.5 and meandering if it exceeded 1.5. Although these 
limiting values are somewhat arbitrary, they have become entrenched in the literature and remain 
widely accepted as the critical limits of sinuosity for a stream to be classed as straight, sinuous or 
meandering. Mixed-load streams, with more mobile bed materials, greater sediment supply and 
resistant somewhat erodible banks, adopt dynamic, meandering courses (Type 3 and 4 in Figure 
3). These channels migrate freely across their floodplains through a combination of cut-bank 
erosion and point bar growth interspersed with neck and chute cutoffs of tight bends. 
   Rivers with sufficiently high energy to transport abundant, relatively coarse sediment moving 
as significant bedload, and with weak bank materials (which eroded and thereby also contribute 
to the sediment load), tend to have very wide channels that feature multithreaded, braided 
patterns (Type 5 in Figure 3). Braided channels are made up of sub channels called anabranches 
which are separated by braid bars that are inundated at bankfull stage. Such channels are of low 
stability and they wander across their floodplains unpredictably through a combination of rapid, 
localized bank erosion and frequent anabranch avulsions. In some rivers the braid bars grow to 
the extent that they are not inundated even at bankfull stage, allowing them to vegetate and 
stabilize as semi permanent islands.  In this case the channel pattern is conventionally classified 
as anastomosed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
894 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3: Classification of channel pattern based on sediment load and system stability (courtesy:  
Schumn, 1977) 
 
Rust (1978) proposed another qualitative diagram for the continuum of patterns, using sinuosity 
and degree of channel division as its axes and allowing subdivision of divided rivers based on 
their sinuosity (Figure 4). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4: Classification of channel pattern based on sinuosity and degree of channel division 
(courtesy: Rust, 1978) 
895 
 
3.1.1. Differentiation of Islands and Bars 
 
The difference between the bars and islands (these are features of braided river morphology) is 
identified by different authors (Brice, 1964; Bridge, 1993; Bristow and Best, 1993; Thorne, 1993). 
Bars are defined as dynamic features which are unvegetated and submerged at bankfull stage. 
Islands are more stable features, emergent at bankfull stage and vegetated. In the case of the 
Jamuna River Thorne et al. (1993) identified three levels of bar. First level bar corresponds to an 
island char and is characterized by mature, perennial vegetation, fully developed agricultural 
practices and permanent habitation. In terms of both elevation and landuse it is very similar to the 
flood plain outside the braid belt. The second level corresponds to braid bars that flank the main 
island in the satellite image. The bars are quite different in appearance to the island. They are 
large sand bodies displaying loose sediment surfaces, immature and annual vegetation, seasonal 
cropping and no permanent habitation. The third, very low bar level is associated with dunes in 
the sub-channels flowing around the bars. These are much smaller features that remain inundated 
at all but the lowest flows.  
 
    
4. Sand Bar Development 
 
 
Braided channels are those marked by successive diversions and rejoining of flow around alluvial 
islands. The presence of only one alluvial island (braid or char) is sufficient to make the channel 
braided, but most braided rivers show several islands between channel banks. The chars are a 
product of the river itself and are composed of both bedload and suspended sediment. Generally 
the islands are unstable and change their location frequently. However under certain conditions 
such as, stabilization by vegetation, they become semi-permanent (Coleman, 1969).Even with the 
voluminous amount of literature published, many of the processes involved in meandering are 
still poorly understood. The flow pattern in a curved channel is helicoidal and results in a slight 
elevation of the water and result in a slight elevation of the water surface against the concave 
(cut) bank. Thus, in a curve there are both a downstream velocity component and a weaker 
sideways component, toward the cut bank at the water surface and towards the point bar at the 
stream bed. These lateral velocity components may reach 10-20% of the downstream velocity. 
Maximum velocity and turbulence are found near the steep cut bank, the speed of flow falling as 
the point bar is reached. The flow patterns thus cause material eroded from the cut bank to be 
deposited on the point bar of the next meander loop downstream. These leads to the downstream 
migration of meander loops and rapid erosion on the cut bank (Coleman, 1969).Newly formed 
char consists of sand of approximately the same coarseness as the bed material of the river reach. 
First two or three years erosion or accretion of the char is the natural phenomena. Char dwellers 
cultivated Ground nuts and Dhaincha/Catkin if fine materials deposited on the bed of the char. 
This process would continue more or less five years until the land enriched with minerals like 
nitrogen and silt/clay. Dhaincha (sesbania aculeata) and Ground nuts are leguminous plant those 
can fix nitrogen directly from air into the soil by their special roots. In addition due to Catkin 
(Saccharum spontaneum) grown every year a layer of silt and clay is deposited over the sand 
layer when the char elevation reaches close to average flood level. After ten to twelve years, the 
char land make suitability for cultivation of rice as well as people have been migrated from 
adjacent char and inhabit in the fertile land due to resource availability. They make their house in 
896 
 
the barren land in the char area. The coordination among people and fertile land with the 
influence of river formed a complete char land. The entire process would be completed within 
twelve to fifteen years. At the final stage the newly formed char turned into a stable char. 
 
 
4.1 Formative condition of bars 
 
Kinoshita (1957) proved that bar formation was independent of the influence of the banks, and 
proposed a first rough condition for alternative bar formation:  B/h< 5 to 20. Chang, et al. 
(1971) who mainly investigated the wavelength of alternative bars in their experiments, found 
that bars only forms when B/h< 12. 
   The channel patterns of alluvial rivers have been classified as straight, meandering and 
braided (Leopold and Wolman, 1957). Callander (1969) and Parker (1976) developed a two-
dimensional flow model to explain the origin of meandering. They treat the meandering or 
braiding tendencies of straight channels as a stability problem. Fredsoe (1978) recommends the 
stability criteria as: B/h0 <8 (straight); B/h0 >60 (braiding). 
   Klaassen and Vermeer (1988a) studied the channel characteristics of the Jamuna River and 
found that the relationships between the average depth (in m), width and the discharge (m3/s) for 
bankfull stapes:  0.23  h Q0.32; B=16.1 Q0.53. 
 
 
5. Livelihood Characteristics of Char Dwellers 
 
5.1 Livelihood Practices 
Household survey revealed that the total population of Char Konabari is about 969 in numbers in 
which 478 are male and 481 are female; however the total population of Dakshin Boro-char is 
about 2745; among them 1355 are male and 1390 are female. About 215 households live in the 
Char Konabari of which about 60 % people are engaged in handloom activities as labor, which 
are their main source of livelihood. Agriculture is the second highest and about 20% people are 
engaged in such practice; among the agricultural farmers, 50% have their own land and rests of 
them are landless. About 4% people are engaged in business (petty business) and rests of the 
people are engaged in day labor activities, van driver and others (boats men) are shown in Figure 
5. On the other hand about 586 households live in Dakshin Boro-char of which about 60% and 
30% people are agricultural farmer and fishermen. On-farm activities are dominant in Dakshin 
Boro-char. Most of the farmers have their own land as well as they also cultivate khas (public) 
land. The rest of the people are engaged in day labor activities, petty business and others (boats 
men) are also shown in Figure 5. 
 
5.1.1. Crop Production 
Different types of crops are cultivated in different seasons of the year in Char Konabari and 
Dakshin Boro-char. The crop calendar of Char Konabari and Dakshin Boro-char are shown in 
Table 1. Apparently three different cropping pattern in a year shows in Char Konabari. These are: 
1) Mustard – Rice (Boro) - Vacant 2) Jute/Dhaincha-Pulses -Vacant and 3) Wheat-Rice (Aman)-
Vacant. But in Dakshin Boro-char have two cropping pattern such as Rice (Boro) – Vacant and 
Jute/Dhaincha - Mustard/Potato/Pepper. 
897 
 
 
 
Figure 5: Livelihood practices of Dakshin Boro-char and Char Konabari 
Table 1: Crop Calendar  
Name of month Name of Crops Jan Feb Mar Apr. May June July Agst. Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec. 
Char Konabari  
Rice   
Boro (BR-29)              
Aman-Kartik             
Dhaincha             
Jute             
Mustard             
Wheat             
Pulses (Lentil)             
Dakshin Boro-char 
Rice              
Boro (BR-28, 
29)  
            
Jute             
Dhaincha             
Mustard             
Potato             
Pepper             
Remarks:  Sowing period       Harvesting period 
 
898 
 
The present study shows that during winter season, various Rabi crops such as oil seeds 
(mustard), pulses (lentil) and wheat are grown in the field of Char Konabari as well as mustard, 
potato, pepper are in the field of Dakshin Boro-char. Jute and Dhaincha are grown during rainy 
season in both of the char. The char dwellers of Konabari cultivate two types of rice but only 
Boro rice is cultivated in Dakshin Boro-char. The Boro season starts from mid January and 
continue to mid May and Amon season starts from mid July continue to mid November. 
Dhaincha is cultivated from mid April to mid October and cropping period of jute is mid April to 
mid August. Mustard and Pepper are cultivated during mid November to mid March and potato is 
also cultivated during December to mid March. Wheat and Pulses are cultivated during 
December to mid March. The total earning from crop production is about 30 lac and 203 lac per 
annum of Char Konabari and Dakshin Boro-char respectively. 
 
5.1.2. Livestock and Poultry 
 
Livestock and poultry are other important livelihood activities in char area. Cow and goat are the 
mentionable cattle. In each year the char Konabari produces almost 188 cows, 238 goats and 
1000 hens. However the Dakshin Boro-char produces almost 2344 cows and 4100 hens. Goats 
are rare in the remote Dakshin Boro-char due to lack of veterinary surgeon. The local people 
noted that goats faced many diseases as compared to cattle. The economic activity mobilizes 
through these natural resources and the farmers of the area earn huge money by selling their 
domestic animals as its prices are so high, on an average the price of a cow, a goat and a hen are 
Tk. 10,000; Tk. 2,000 and Tk. 200 respectively. The dwellers of Char Konabari and Dakshin 
Boro-char also earn a handsome amount by producing milk and eggs as well as about Tk. 36 lac 
and Tk. 130 lac per annum respectively. 
 
5.1.3. Non Agricultural Works 
 
The non agricultural works like handloom worker, van driver and petty business are common 
livelihood practices in Char Konabari. During the rainy season the handloom workers do not have 
any work. Generally, non agricultural workers are getting about Tk. 2,500 per month in the 
adjacent area of Char Konabari. On the other hand, in Dakshin Boro-char the fishermen, van 
driver and petty business are common non agricultural occupations. The fishermen and others 
non agricultural workers are getting Tk. 6,000 and Tk. 4,500 per month respectively. 
 
5.2 Livelihood Resources 
 
The land area of Char Konabari is about 53 hectare, out of that 30 hectare land are used for 
agricultural purpose. The resources available in Char Konabari are cultivable lands, grazing land 
and domestic animals. The total numbers of employed person of Char Konabari are 267. Out of 
them only 54 people engaged with on farming activities and others are involved with off farming 
activities. On the other hand the land area of Dakshin Boro-char is about 260 hectare, out of that 
130 hectare land are used for agricultural purpose, 100 hectare are non agricultural land and 30 
hectare are settlement area. Cultivated land, Domestic animal, grazing land and wet land are the 
major natural resources of Dakshin Boro-char. The total numbers of employed people in Dakshin 
Boro-char are 598 and most of them are engaged in agricultural and fisheries activities. 
  Table 2 shows that in Char Konabari one-fourth of the total employed person earned the two-
third of the total yearly income of the village as well as remaining four-fifth employed person 
899 
 
earned only one-third of the total yearly income. Table 2 also shows that in Dakshin Boro-char 
the majority of the yearly income comes from natural resource based occupations such as 
agriculture, poultry and fishing.  The total yearly income of the Char Konabari and Dakshin 
Boro-char are about Tk.136 lac, Tk.619 lac respectively and the daily per capita income are about 
US$0.54 and US$0.87 respectively (1US$=72Tk.). This indicates that the char dwellers 
economic status stands below the poverty line compare the present poverty data. 
 
Table 2: Sources of Livelihood Resources 
 
Type of Activities  Livelihood Resources Yearly Income 
(Tk. in lac ) 
Char Konabari 
Crops 29.52 
Cattle  18.8 Livestock 
Goats 4.76 
Poultry  2 
On Farming Activities 
Livestock by product (milk & egg) 36 
Off Farming Activities Hand loom & others 45 
Total 136.08 
Dakshin Boro-char 
Crops 203.6 
Livestock (Cattle) 140.5 
Poultry  8.2 On Farming Activities 
Livestock by product (milk & egg) 130.5 
Fish 126 Off Farming Activities Others 10.5 
Total 619.3 
 
 
6. Conclusion 
 
The Ganges-Padma and the Brahmaputra-Jamuna river systems drain a huge area of land outside 
the territory of Bangladesh. The river systems in Bangladesh carry 2.4 billion tons of sediments 
(Khan, 1994), a part of which is deposited in the floodplains each year. As a result, every year 
several chars are emerged and washed out repeatedly.Bangladesh was, and continues to be, 
formed by sedimentation and accretion of rivers as they flow from the Himalayas to the Bay of 
Bengal. Extensive char areas have been created along the bed or basin of big rivers the Jamuna, 
the Padma and the Meghna. Char lands are the sandbars that emerge as islands within the river 
channel or as attached land to the riverbanks. The entire process of char formation would be 
completed within twelve to fifteen years. After fifteen years it is turn into stable char. The 
resources of the less stable attached char like Char Konabari is agricultural dominated but most of 
the char dwellers are engaged in off farm activities. The bulk amount of yearly income comes 
from on farming activities rather than off farming activities. However off farming activities is 
also popular in an attached char dwellers due to easy communication but their contribution is not 
remarkable in respect to on farming activities. The Jamuna is basically braided river and produce 
less stable sand bars within the river channel. However, Padma shows meandering characteristic 
and produce stable attached char to the riverbanks. Stable chars are more resourceful than less 
900 
 
stable char. The stability of char has a positive relationship to the stability of livelihoods of char 
dwellers. The char dwellers livelihood is more vulnerable in the dynamic char than stable char. 
The present study concluded that the char dwellers’ economic status stands below the poverty 
line compared to the present poverty data. 
 
 
References 
 
Brice, J.C., ‘Channel patterns and terraces of the Loup Rivers’, Nebraska. US Geological Survey 
Professional Paper, 422-D, 1964. 
Bridge, J.S., ‘The interaction between channel geometry, water flow, sediment transport and 
deposition in braided rivers’, In: Best, J.L. and Bristow, C.S. (Eds), Braided Rivers. 
Geological Society of London Special Publication no. 75, 13-63, 1993. 
Bristow, C.S., ‘Brahmaputra River: Channel migration and deposition’, In: Ethridge, F.G., Flores, 
R.M. and Harvey, M.D. (Eds), Recent Developments in Fluvial Sedimentology. Society of 
Economic Palaeontologists and Mineralogists, Special Publication no. 39, 63-74. 1987. 
Bristow, C. S. and Best, J. L., ‘Braided Rivers’, the Geological Society Special Publicatio
n No. 75, London, 1993. 
Chang, Y., Simons, D., and Woolhiser, D. A., ‘Flume experiments on alternative Bar For
mation, ‘Proceeding, ASCE, Waterways Division, Vol. 97, No. WW1, Feb 1971. 
Coleman, J.M., ‘Brahmaputra River: Channel processes and sedimentation’, Sedimentary 
Geology, 3, 129-239, 1969. 
Callander, R.A., ‘Instability and river Channels’, Journal of Fluid Mechanics, 36, part 3, pp465-
480, 1969. 
Chambers, R., ‘Participatory Workshops: A Source book of 21 sets of ideas and activities’, 
London, Earthscan Publications Ltd., 2000.  
Ferdsoe, J., ‘Meandering and Braiding of Rivers’, Journal of Fluid Mechanics, 84, part 4, pp609-
624,1978. 
Hossain, M.M., Hasan, K.M. and Mukto, M.A., ‘Island characteristics using remote sensing 
data: A case study on two islands of The Brahmaputra River in Bangladesh’, Proceedings of 
International Workshop: Sharing innovative experience on promoting best practices for 
conservation, management and sustainable use of water resources in the south, TWNSO, ICTP, 
Triests, Italy, pp. 11-20, November 2000. 
Irrigation Support Project for Asia and the Near East (ISPAN), ‘Overview reports, inventory 
reports and other reports on charlands’, FAP 16 and FAP 19, prepared for Flood Plan 
Coordination Organization (FPCO), Ministry of Water Resources, Government of the People's 
Republic of Bangladesh, Dhaka, 1995. 
Khan, M. A. H., ‘Environmental aspects of surface water development projects in Bangladesh’, 
In: ‘Environment and development in Bangladesh, edited by A Atiq Rahman, Saleemul Huq, 
Rana Haider and Erik G Jansen, published by University Press Limited., 1994. 
Kinoshita, R.,  ‘On the formation of river dunes, an observation of the meandering state’, 
Translation, JSCE, English translation by G. Parker, Vol. 42, pp. 1-21, 1957. 
Klaassen, G.J. and Vermeer, K., ‘Channel Characteristics of the braiding Jamuna (Lower 
Brahmaputra) River, Bangladesh’, Proceeding of International Conference on river Regime, 
Wallingford, England, 1988a. 
Kothari, C.R., ‘Research Methodology, Methods and Techniques’, Wishwa Prakashon, New Delhi, 
India, 1996. 
901 
 
Leopold, L.B. and Wolman, M.G., ‘River Channel Patterns - Braided, Meandering and Straight’, 
United States Geological Survey, Professional Paper 282B, pp. 283-300, 1957. 
Leopold, L.B., Wolman, M.G. and Miller, J.P, 'Fluvial Process in Geomorphology' San Francisco, 
California, 522pp, 1964. 
Parker, G., ‘On the Cause and Characteristics Scales of Meandering and Braiding in Rivers’, 
Journal of Fluid Mechanics, 76, part 3, pp457-480, 1976. 
Rust, B.R., ‘A classification of alluvial channel systems’, In: Miall, A.D. (Ed.), Fluvial 
Sedimentology. Canadian Society of Petroleum Geologists, Calgary, Memoir no. 5, pp187-198, 
1978. 
Schumm, S.A., and khan, H.R., ‘Experimental Study of Channel Patterns’, Geological Society of 
America Bulletin, v. 83, pp.1755-1770, 1972. 
Schumm, S.A., ‘The Fluvial System’, Wiley, New York, pp 338, 1977. 
Sarker M. H., Iffat H. and Mustafa A., ‘Rivers, chars and char people of Bangladesh’, Intl. J. 
River Basin Management, IAHR, Vol. 1, No. 1 (2003), pp. 61–80, 2003. 
Thorne, C.R., Russell, A.P.G. and Alam, M.K., ‘Planform pattern and channel evolution of the 
Brahmaputra River, Bangladesh’, In: Best, J.L. and Bristow, C.S. (Eds), Braided Rivers. 
Geological Society of London Special Publication, no.75, pp 257-275, 1993. 
 
 
  902 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
RAIN WATER HARVESTING AND WATER CONSERVATION  
IN BANGLADESH CONTEXT 
 
 
Qazi Azizul Mowla1 
 
 
ABSTRACT: Human being could not save and conserve water and it sources, probably because of 
its availability in abundance. But this irresponsible attitude resulted in deterioration of water bodies 
and sources with respect to quantity and quality both. Now there is a crisis in the water resource 
scenario all over the world as well as in Bangladesh and it is more acute in urban areas. Bangladesh 
is a deltaic country located in the tropical monsoon zone signifying that the country is full of water 
bodies, water channels and rivers and also receives abundant rainfall. It automatically dictates that 
Rain Water Harvesting and Water Conservation should be the prime source of our water needs. 
As the water crisis continues to become severe, there is a dire need of reform in water management 
system and revival of traditional systems. In our cities people depend on public sector water supply 
system, which has resulted in disruption of community participation in water management and 
collapse of traditional water harvesting and conservation systems. The seriousness of this issue and to 
initiate efforts to overcome those problems must be realized. However, "better late than never", Rain 
Water Harvesting and Water Conservation in Bangladesh Context is worth trying and the paper is 
aiming to assess the scenario. Review of Rainwater Harvesting potentialities in Dhaka suggest that, if 
it is interwoven with the system of building and urban design in Dhaka than theoretically Dhaka will 
not have any water shortfall both for consumable and non-consumable demand. The paper discusses 
the levels and technicalities at which rain water can be harvested and conserved to be incorporated 
into the urban design system. 
 
Keywords: Urban Environment; Rainwater Harvesting; Water Conservation; Urban Design, 
Sustainable Development. 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Human being could not save and conserve water and it sources, probably because of its availability in 
abundance. But this irresponsible attitude resulted in deterioration of water bodies with respect to 
                                               
1 Professor, Department of Architecture, Bangladesh University of Engineering & Technology (BUET), 
Dhaka-1000, BANGLADESH. e-mail: qmowla@yahoo.co.uk 
  903 
quantity and quality both. Now, situation has arrived when even a single drop of water matters. Half 
the developing world population do no have access to basic sanitation and safe drinking water. 
Average human being require only 5-10 litre of water for drinking and cooking, rest is all non-
consumable demand. More then 2200 Million Litres per Day (MLD) of water is required in Dhaka, 
little more than half of which (1500 MLD) is supplied by Dhaka Water and Sewerage Authority 
(WASA) of which major portion (1300 MLD) is extracted from underground (Mowla,2008). Current 
annual withdrawal of ground water in Dhaka is in excess of annual recharging of the aquifers. 
Though there is a huge deficit, withdrawal rate in the city should in fact, be reduced to prevent 
further lowering of he water table level which is already at an alarming low. To avoid wholesale 
extraction of underground, new sources of extra water, need to be identified for 
exploration.Bangladesh is a deltaic country located in the tropical monsoon zone signifying that the 
country is full of water bodies, water channels and rivers and also receives abundant rainfall (Mowla, 
2005). It automatically dictates that Rain Water Harvesting and Water Conservation should be the 
prime source of our water needs. In Dhaka about 160 thousand litres of water might be available 
from a roof top of 100 sq.m in an average year, that is, about 8 person’s water requirement of 120 
days, which is quite significant. As the water crisis continues to become severe, there is a dire need 
of reform in water management system and revival of traditional systems. In our cities people depend 
on public sector water supply system, which has resulted in disruption of community participation in 
water management and collapse of traditional water harvesting and conservation systems.The 
seriousness of this issue and to initiate efforts to overcome those problems must be realized. 
However, "better late than never", Rain Water Harvesting and Water Conservation in Bangladesh 
Context is worth trying. 
 
 
2. Rain Water Harvesting 
 
"Conscious collection and storage of rainwater to cater to the demands of water, for drinking, 
domestic purpose and irrigation is termed as Rainwater Harvesting." Water harvesting techniques had 
been evolved and developed centuries ago. Extensive rainwater harvesting apparatus existed 4000 
years ago in the Palestine and Greece. In ancient Rome, residences were built with individual cisterns 
and paved courtyards to capture rain water to augment water from city’s aqueducts. As early as the 
third century millennium BC, farming communities in Baluchistan and Kutch impounded rain water 
and used it for irrigation dams (Mowla, 2005). Though rain fall and water is in abundance in this 
deltaic region called Bangladesh the concept of water harvesting is not new for Bangladesh either. 
Rainwater harvesting is the process of augmenting the natural filtration of rainwater in to the 
underground formation by some artificial methods (DAB-PWD, 2002). In the natural process ground 
water resource gets naturally recharged through percolation. But due to indiscriminate development 
and rapid urbanization, exposed surface for soil has been reduced drastically with resultant reduction 
in percolation of rainwater, thereby depleting ground water resource. Rainwater Harvesting is needed 
to arrest ground water decline and augment ground water table; to beneficiate water quality in 
aquifers; to conserve surface water runoff during monsoon; to reduce city flooding and water 
logging; to reduce soil erosion; and to inculcate a culture of water conservation. 
 
  904 
 
3. Rainwater Scenario in Dhaka 
 
Considering the Dhaka city corporation (DCC) area of urban Dhaka at approximately 500 sq.km with 
an average annual rainfall of 2200mm, the total rainfall received in Dhaka is about 1100000 million 
litres or 3013.7 MLD (Mowla,2008). Present demand of water in Dhaka is about 2200 MLD. If 70% 
of the urban area is assumed to be developed and 50% of it to be roofed and 70% of rainfall received 
in Dhaka is collected, the quantity of rain that can be realistically harvested works out to 738.36 
MLD. This is a significant quantity compared to the DWASA supply in Dhaka. Above assessment 
shows that about 25% of the rainwater falling over Dhaka can be harvested. With proper planning 
more of it can be retained for natural recharged through percolation.  Here only rain water has been 
considered as an alternative source of water. 
    
4. System of Collection of Rainwater and Conservation  
 
System of collection of rainwater and conserving it for future needs has traditionally been practiced 
in Bangladesh. The traditional systems were time-tested wisdom of not only appropriate technology 
of Rainwater Harvesting, but also water management systems, where conservation of water was the 
prime concern (Fig.1). Traditional water harvesting systems were tanks/pond, step wells, lakes, 
wetland etc. These were the water storage bodies to cater for domestic and irrigation demands. 
Diversion of run off into existing water bodies for storage is a traditional methods but recharge to 
ground water is a new concept in rainwater harvesting (Mowla,2005). People were themselves 
responsible for the maintenance of water sources and optimal use of water that could fulfil their 
needs. Techniques used for urban rain water harvesting could be storage in artificial above or 
underground tanks; recharging aquifer directly through existing dug up ponds, wells and bore wells; 
recharging aquifer b percolation / soakage into the ground; and pumping (putting under pressure) 
rainwater into the soil to prevent sea/pollution/salinity ingress. Broadly there are two ways of 
harvesting rainwater:  
   i) Surface runoff harvesting: In urban area rainwater flows away as surface runoff. This runoff 
could be caught and used for recharging aquifers by adopting appropriate methods. Harvesting and 
conservation may be at two scales ie city wide scale and household level (Fig. 1). The traditional 
system was of dig-elevate-dwell whereby ensuring water retention during rainfalls / floods and 
reservoir for lean period (Fig.3). The system protecting the homesteads above flood levels with crop 
fields around helped create adequate biomass was a time tested approach of the settlement pattern for 
sustainability in the area (Mowla, 2005 & 2008). 
   Traditional Architecture, Urban Design and planning in this region offers the best and integrated 
solutions towards human needs, in their relation with the nature, ecosystems and the community but 
contemporary development ignored living with nature. Water logging is an inherent problem 
associated with uncontrolled urbanization and lack of holistic planning in Dhaka (Fig.4). Dhaka 
structure plan, DMDP (1995) however, attempted to take into cognisance the water dynamics and the 
traditional attitude prevailing in the region, but it was not followed due to the short sightedness of the 
Capital development authority. 
 
  905 
ii) Roof top rainwater harvesting: It is a system of catching rainwater where it falls. In rooftop 
harvesting, the roof becomes the catchments, and the rainwater is collected from the roof of the 
house/building (DAB-PWD, 2002). It can either be stored in a tank or diverted to artificial recharge 
system. This method is less expensive and very effective and if implemented properly helps in 
augmenting the ground water level of the area (Fig.2). 
 
Figure 1 Various Levels of Rain Water Harvesting, at regional to household level. 
   
  
Figure 2 Roof top rainwater harvesting Systems 
 
                    
Figure 3 Settlement Pattern Evolving out of traditional needs in response to water bodies. 
Contemporary 
Scenario over 
Traditional skeleton 
  906 
 
 
Figure 4 DMDP’ 95 - Proposed Plan Policy Areas i.e. built and natural areas for Dhaka. 
 
 
4.1. Components of roof top rainwater harvesting system 
 
The illustrative design of the basic components of roof top rainwater harvesting system is given in 
the typical schematic diagram (Fig 2) / the system mainly constitutes of following sub 
components: Catchments; Transportation; First flush and Filter.  
                      
4.1.1. Catchments:  
 
The surface that receives rainfall directly is the catchments of rainwater harvesting system. A roof 
with single plane or a reduced number of planes will assist in maximizing the efficient collection of 
rain water, helping to direct water to storage. Catchments may be terrace, courtyard, or paved or 
unpaved open ground. The terrace may be flat RCC/stone roof or sloping roof. Therefore the 
catchment is the area, which actually contributes rainwater to the harvesting system. 
 
 
Detention Ponds 
Main flood 
Flow Zone 
Sub-Flood Flow Zone 
Bouriganga River  
Reserved Wetlands 
and Retention 
Ponds 
DMDP’ 1995-2015 
Dhaka 
  907 
4.1.2. Transportation:  
 
Rainwater from rooftop should be carried through down take water pipes or drains 
to storage/harvesting system. Water pipes should be UV resistant (ISI HDPE/PVC pipes) of required 
capacity. Water from sloping roofs could be caught through gutters and down take pipe. At terraces, 
mouth of the each drain should have wire mesh to restrict floating material. 
 
4.1.3. First flush:  
 
First flush diverter separates the water received in first shower. The first shower of rains needs to be 
flushed-off to avoid contaminating storable/rechargeable water by the probable contaminants of the 
atmosphere and the catchment roof. It will also help in cleaning of silt and other material deposited 
on roof during dry seasons Provisions of first rain separator should be made at outlet of each 
drainpipe.  
 
4.1.4. Filter:  
 
There is always some scepticism regarding Roof Top Rainwater Harvesting since doubts are raised 
that rainwater may contaminate groundwater. There is remote possibility of this fear coming true if 
proper filter mechanism is not adopted. Secondly all care must be taken to see that underground 
sewer drains are not punctured and no leakage is taking place in close vicinity. Filters are used from 
treatment of water to effectively remove turbidity, colour and micro organisms. After first flushing of 
rainfall, water should pass through filters. There are different types of filters in practice, but basic 
function is to purify water ie. Sand Gravel Filter; Charcoal Filter; PVC Pipe Filter; Sponge Filter; and 
so on (Fig.5). 
 
Sand Gravel Filter: These are commonly used filters, constructed by brick masonry and filleted by 
pebbles, gravel, and sand as shown in the figure. Each layer should be separated by wire mesh. 
 
Charcoal Filter: Charcoal filter can be made in-situ or in a drum. Pebbles, gravel, sand and charcoal 
as shown in the figure should fill the drum or chamber. Each layer should be separated by wire mesh. 
Thin layer of charcoal is used to absorb odour if any. 
 
PVC Pipe Filter: This filter can be made by PVC pipe of 1 to 1.20 m length; Diameter of pipe 
depends on the area of roof. Six inches dia. pipe is enough for a 1500 Sq. Ft. roof and 8 inches dia. 
pipe should be used for roofs more then 1500 Sq. Ft. Pipe is divided into three compartments by wire 
mesh. Each component should be filled with gravel and sand alternatively as shown in the figure. A 
layer of charcoal could also be inserted between two layers. Both ends of filter should have reduced 
than required size to connect inlet and outlet. This filter could be placed horizontally or vertically in 
the system. 
 
Sponge Filter: It is a simple filter made from PVC drum having a layer of sponge in the middle of 
drum. It is the easiest and cheapest form filter, suitable for residential units. 
  908 
 
 
  
First flush diverter 
  
Sand Gravel Filter;                                        Charcoal Filter; 
  
PVC Pipe Filter;                                               Sponge Filter 
 
Figure 5 Different types of Filter Systems for Rainwater Harvesting 
 
 
 
  909 
4.2. Method and use of roof top rainwater harvesting  
 
4.2.1. Storage for Use:  
In this method rain water collected from the roof of the building is diverted to a storage tank. The 
storage tank has to be designed according to the water requirements, rainfall and catchment 
availability. Each drainpipe should have mesh filter at mouth and first flush device followed by 
filtration system before connecting to the storage tank. It is advisable that each tank should have 
excess water over flow system.Excess water could be diverted to recharge system. Water from 
storage tank can be used for secondary purposes such as washing and gardening etc. This is the most 
cost effective way of rainwater harvesting. The main advantage of collecting and using the rainwater 
during rainy season is not only to save water from conventional sources, but also to save energy 
incurred on transportation and distribution of water at the doorstep. This also conserves groundwater, 
if it is being extracted to meet the demand when rains are on. 
 
4.2.2. Recharging Ground water aquifers:  
Ground water aquifers can be recharged by various kinds of structures to ensure percolation of 
rainwater in the ground instead of draining away from the surface. The idea is similar to the soak pits 
for toilet waste commonly used in Bangladesh. Commonly used recharging methods are: 
a) Recharging of bore wells                  
b)    Recharging of dug wells. 
c)    Recharge pits                                     
d)    Recharge Trenches 
e)    Soak ways or Recharge Shafts      
f)    Percolation Tanks 
 
Recharging of Bore Wells  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  910 
Rainwater collected from rooftop of the building is diverted through drainpipes to settlement or 
filtration tank. After settlement filtered water is diverted to bore wells to recharge deep aquifers. 
Abandoned bore wells can also be used for recharge.While recharging, entry of floating matter and 
silt should be restricted because it may clog the recharge structure. "first one or two shower should be 
flushed out through  rain separator to avoid contamination. This is very important, and all care should 
be taken to ensure that this has been done." Recharge pits are small pits of any shape rectangular, 
square or circular, contracted with brick or stone masonry wall with weep hole at regular intervals. 
Top of pit can be covered with perforated covers. Bottom of pit should be filled with filter media.The 
capacity of the pit can be designed on the basis of catchment area, rainfall intensity and recharge rate 
of soil. Usually the dimensions of the pit may be of 1 to 2 m width and 2 to 3 m deep depending on 
the depth of pervious strata. These pits are suitable for recharging of shallow aquifers, and small 
houses.Soak away or recharge shafts are provided where upper layer of soil is alluvial or less 
pervious. These are bored hole of 30 cm dia. up to 10 to 15 m deep, depending on depth of pervious 
layer. Bore should be lined with slotted/perforated PVC/MS pipe to prevent collapse of the vertical 
sides. At the top of soak away required size sump is constructed to retain runoff before the filters 
through soak away. Sump should be filled with filter media.Dug well can be used as recharge 
structure. Rainwater from the rooftop is diverted to dug wells after passing it through filtration bed. 
Cleaning and desalting of dug well should be done regularly to enhance the recharge rate. The 
filtration method suggested for bore well recharging could be used.Recharge trench in provided 
where upper impervious layer of soil is shallow. It is a trench excavated on the ground and refilled 
with porous media like pebbles, boulder or brickbats. it is usually made for harvesting the surface 
runoff. Bore wells can also be provided inside the trench as recharge shafts to enhance percolation. 
The length of the trench is decided as per the amount of runoff expected. This method is suitable for 
small houses, playgrounds, parks and roadside drains. The recharge trench can be of size 0.50 to 1.0 
m wide and 1.0 to 1.5 m deep. 
 
     
  911 
Recharge Pits                                                          Soak ways or Recharge Shafts  
  
 
Percolation tanks 
 
Percolation tanks are artificially created surface water bodies, submerging a land area with adequate 
permeability to facilitate sufficient percolation to recharge the ground water. These can be built in big 
campuses where land is available and topography is suitable preferable in relatively low laying areas. 
This is the most common type seen in Bangladesh. Surface run-off and roof top water can be diverted 
to this tank. Water accumulating in the tank percolates in the solid to augment the ground water. The 
stored water can be used directly for gardening and raw use. Percolation tanks should be built in 
gardens, open spaces and roadside green belts of urban area. 
 
 
4.3. Precautions in the rainwater harvesting 
 
Harvested rainwater is used for direct usage or for recharging aquifers. It is most important to ensure 
that the rainwater caught is free from pollutants. Following precautionary measures should be taken 
while harvesting rainwater: 
 Roof or terraces uses for harvesting should be clean, free from dust, algal plants etc. 
 Roof should not be painted since most paints contain toxic substances and may peel off. 
 Do not store chemicals, rusting iron, manure or detergent on the roof. 
 Nesting of birds on the roof should be prevented. 
 Terraces should not be used for toilets either by human beings or by pets. 
 Provide gratings at mouth of each drainpipe on terraces to trap leaves debris and floating 
materials. 
 Provision of first rain separator should be made to flush off first rains. 
  912 
 Do not use polluted water to recharge ground water. 
 Ground water should only be recharged by rainwater. 
 Before recharging, suitable arrangements of filtering should be provided. 
 Filter media should be cleaned before every monsoon season. 
 During rainy season, the whole system (roof catchment, pipes, screens, first flush, filters, 
tanks) should be checked before and after each rain and preferably cleaned after every dry 
period exceeding a month. 
 At the end of the dry season and just before the first shower of rain is anticipated, the storage 
tank should be scrubbed and flushed off all sediments and debris. 
 
 
5. Conclusion 
 
Review of Rainwater Harvesting potentialities in Dhaka suggest that, if it is interwoven with the 
system of building and urban design in Dhaka than theoretically Dhaka will not have any water 
shortfall both for consumable and non-consumable demand. Building and planning regulations 
should therefore incorporate / integrate water harvesting and conservation issue in the physical 
development framework of Dhaka. 
References 
 
DAB-PWD (2002). Rain Water Harvesting Manual,  Joint publication by Department of Architecture 
– Public Works Department, MoH&PW, GoB, 2002, Dhaka. 
 
DMDP (1995). Dhaka Metropolitan Development Plan 1995-2015, GOB / RAJUK, Dhaka. 
 
Mowla, Q.A. (2005). Eco-systems and Sustainable Urban Design Nexus: A Borderless Concept, in 
the Global IIT 2005. Alumni Conference on “Technology without Borders”, May 20-22, 2005, 
Bethesda, Washington DC, USA. 
 
Mowla, Q.A. (2008). Eco-Sustainability of Urban Environment: The Case of Dhaka, Paper presented 
in the International Continuing Education Meet on “Sustainable Communities – Bridging the Gap 
between Research and Action”, jointly organized by TKK-Finland, AIT-Thailand, UN-HABITAT 
and UNEP, 11-22 August 2008, AIT Bangkok. 
 
Web site: 
Image Source: http://www.bing.com/images/search?q=Rain+water+Harvesting & Form=Z7FD 
Discussion: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rainwater_Harvesting (Ref. aquifers & Ground water 
Recharge) 
 
913 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
URBAN OPEN SPACE AND GREEN PROPOSALS OF KHULNA CITY MASTER PLAN 
AND THEIR IMPLEMENTATION 
 
 
Tusar Kanti Roy1 
 
 
ABSTRACT: Urban open space and greens include parks, stadiums, playgrounds, botanical 
gardens, zoo, roadside green, riverfront green and urban forest. All these form one of the most 
vital amenities that the city demands to fulfil its recreational, health and environmental needs. 
Khulna is the third largest industrial city of Bangladesh. The ratio of open space for Khulna city 
per 1,000 population was only 0.40 acre in 1961 and 0.10 acre in 2001, both of which were 
miserably low compared with urban open space standard in any country. Khulna City Master 
Plan of 1961 and 2001 prepared by Khulna Development Authority (KDA) recommended a 
standard of 4.00 acre and 2.71 acre open space per 1,000 population with a good number of open 
space and green proposals based on the then situation, future demand and planning standards 
followed in different urban area Master Plans of the cities and towns of Bangladesh. In spite of 
having significance and potentials of Khulna City, all the government and concerned 
organizations took very little initiative to implement the open space and green proposals during 
the last 5 decades. Open space and green proposals are mainly implemented by Khulna City 
Corporation (KCC), KDA and Department of Forest (DoF) using their respective development 
control regulations and development projects. Implementation of large number of open space and 
green proposals could create adequate recreational facilities and better environment for the urban 
people of Khulna City. But, the real fact is that implementation of the open space and green 
proposals of Khulna City Master Plan is quite inadequate and unsatisfactory. Lack of awareness 
of city people and concerned organizations for the need of open space, lack of political 
commitment, scarcity of fund and inadequate institutional set up of KDA and KCC mainly with 
urban planners etc. are found to be the major reasons for slow and non-implementation of the 
open space and green proposals. The paper attempts to explore the open space and green 
proposals in Khulna City Master Plan; status of their implementation; and recommendations for 
implementation of the proposals at satisfactory level for recreational, health and environmental 
development of Khulna City.  
 
Keywords: Khulna City, City Master Plan, Urban Open Space and Green, Planning Standard   
 
 
 
 
                                                
1 Assistant Professor, Department of Urban and Regional Planning, Khulna University of Engineering & 
Technology (KUET), Khulna-9203,  Bangladesh., E-mail:tusarpln@yahoo.com. 
 
914 
 
1. Introduction and Background 
 
Open spaces and greens form one of the most vital amenities that the city demands to fulfill its 
recreational and environmental needs. Open space or green of any kind is a source of outlet of 
self-expression that helps both promotion of physical and mental health. The 1961 Master Plan of 
Khulna city recommended 4 acres of open space for every 1000 population. But this target could 
not be achieved because of non-execution of open space schemes. Dhaka Metropolitan 
Development Plan recommended only 0.16 acre for every 1000 population. They had to fix such 
a low standard because of high scarcity of vacant land in and around the city. Urban 
Development Directorate in 1985 fixed a reasonable standard (1 acre / 1000 population) for the 
district and upazila level towns by its Zila and Upazila Planning project. Though several plans 
were prepared under the programme none was executed. The 1961 situation of Khulna city has 
undergone substantial changes. Now it is extremely difficult to find a sizable chunk of vacant 
land in the city for use as a Central Park. At the same time the need for open space for future 
population can not be ignored. Considering the foregoing discussion of standard provisions, 
availability of resources and usable space the plan suggests a minimum 2 acres of open space per 
1000 population. The recommended actual open space and green stands at 2.71 per 1000 
population. 
   In spite of having significance and potentials of Khulna City, over about the last 50 years all the 
government and concerned organizations took very little initiative to establish parks for the city 
dwellers. There are only 10 small sized parks in Khulna City of which 7 are for children and 3 are 
for all. As most of the schools and colleges in Khulna City have very small amount of land for 
the sports and amusement, there should be a large number of public parks to cater to the 
amusement and refreshment. Existing environment and facilities of the parks needs to be 
improved with utmost care so that maximum number of children and city people can optimally 
use the parks for their mental refreshment and sound health. There exists no formal sizable park 
in Khulna city that a metropolitan city should have. There is no metropolitan or regional park 
within the Master Plan area. The existing open spaces in the city are scattered in small pieces and 
mostly used as play lots, neighborhood parks and play grounds. There is one international level 
stadium at Boyra on an area of about 9 acres. Apart from public open spaces there are many play 
fields within the premises of educational institutions meant for the concerned institutions. The 
Park-Cum-Zoo at Gilatala is quite large. Its area is about 40.00 acre. But its distance from the 
main city and non-availability of easy transport mode makes its accessibility difficult for a large 
segment of the city dwellers living in the far off residential areas of the southern part. There is no 
formal park or green space either at Noapara or at Fultala. There are only one standard stadium, 
one small stadium, a large field and a large number of institution based play fields throughout the 
City Master Plan are.  
 
 
2. Objectives of the Study 
 
The objectives of the study are 
i) to explore the open space and green proposals in Khulna City Master Plan  
ii) to review of the status of implementation the open space and green proposals  
iii) to draw some recommendations for implementation of the proposals at satisfactory level for 
recreational, health and environmental development of Khulna City. 
 
915 
 
3. Methodology 
 
Under the study Engineers, Planners, Architects, Surveyors of KCC and KDA, Civil Society 
representative are interviewed to gather their opinions and views on the present status of parks 
and open space in Khulna city. Their suggestions for creation of more parks and open space for 
Khulna city are documented. Parks and open space proposals and related issues highlighted in the 
Master Plans of Khulna city of 2001 and 1961 are reviewed. Field visits of some proposed sites 
for parks and open space are conducted for this study. Books, journals, reports etc. on parks and 
open space collected from internet and other sources are studied.      
 
 
4. Khulna City as the Study Area  
 
Khulna is the third largest industrial and second largest port city of Bangladesh. It is a divisional 
city and acts as regional hub of administrative, institutional, commercial and academic affairs. It 
is located on the banks of the Rupsha and the Bhairab Rivers. It lies between 22047´16´´ to 22052´ 
north latitude and 89031´36´´ to 89034´35´´ east longitude. The city covers an area of 45.65 
square kilometers with a population of near about 1.5 million. The city, for administrative 
purposes, is divided into 31 wards: each ward consists of different mahallas, the total number of 
which is 143 (Population Census, 2001). Khulna Municipality was established in 1884. The area 
within which municipal limits was 12.02 square kilometers (KDA Master Plan, 2001). During 
late 1950s, and early 1960s Khulna became an important centre for industrial development. With 
the establishment of Mongla port, just about 40 km. south of Khulna, the city gained further 
momentum. Many new industries were setup at Khulna and commercial activities increased 
manifolds, and thus, the city became centre point of jute industries and jute trade in Bangladesh. 
After liberation, the population of Khulna continued to rise. Economy of the city is again 
strengthened with introduction of regional shrimp farming and shrimp processing activities (KDA 
Structure Plan, 2001). The average household size of Khulna City is 4.5 and literacy rate is 
around 94% (Population Census, 2001). Monthly income of about 66 percent employed people is 
within Tk. 5,000. About 30 percent of the total employs monthly income is within Tk. 2,500. 
They are the people who live below poverty level. Only 3.5 per cent of the employed people 
belong to monthly income group Tk. 15,000 and above (Khan, 2006).  
 
 
5. Open Space Standards for the Cities of Bangladesh and Other Countries 
 
In determining standards for open space consideration must be given to two major issues –first, 
future requirement of open space and second, availability of vacant land. However, before fixing 
up standard a review of open space standard is made of recent and past urban plans of various 
towns and cities in Bangladesh. Khulna is the third largest industrial city of Bangladesh. The ratio 
of open space for Khulna city per 1,000 population was only 0.40 acre in 1961 and 0.10 acre in 
2001, both of which are miserably low compared with urban open space standard in any country. 
Khulna City Master Plan of 1961 and 2001 prepared by Khulna Development Authority (KDA) 
recommended a standard of 4.00 acre and 2.71 acre open space per 1,000 population with a good 
number of open space and green proposals based on the then situation, future demand and 
planning standards followed in different urban area Master Plans of the cities and towns of 
Bangladesh. 
916 
 
Table 1: Open space and green standard in cities of Bangladesh and other country 
 
Hong 
Kong (for 
Hong 
Kong City) 
Detailed 
Area Plan 
(DAP), 
2009, 
RAJUK (for 
Dhaka City) 
Dhaka 
Metropolitan 
Development Plan, 
1995, RAJUK 
(for Dhaka City) 
Zila/Upazila 
Master 
Plan,1985, 
UDD 
(for District 
and Upazila 
Towns) 
Khulna City 
Master 
Plan,1961, 
KDA (for 
Khulna City) 
Recommend
ation of 
Khulna City 
Master 
Plan,2001, 
KDA (for 
Khulna City) 
0.71 
acre/1000 
Population 
0.16  
acre/1000 
Population  
0.16  acre/1000 
Population  
1 acre/1000 
Population 
4 acres/1000 
Population 
Minimum 2 
acres/ 1000 
Population 
Source: 1. Khulna City Master Plan, 1961; 2. Zila/Upazila Master Plan Project, 1985; 3. Dhaka 
Metropolitan Development Planning Project, 1995; 4. Khulna City Master Plan, 2001; and 5. The 
Daily Star Weekend Magazine, 9 December, 2011 
 
A developing megacity such as Dhaka should have at least 25 percent of its total land as open 
space; as of now, less than 10 percent of its land, is allocated as open space. The Detailed Area 
Plan (DAP) of RAJUK (Rajdhani Unnayan Kartripakkho) for Dhaka City approved in 2010 
proposed only 0.13 acres of parks and open space for 1,000 persons, which is significantly lower 
than the World Health Organization’s recommendation of 4.23 acres per 1,000 persons. A 
reasonable standard (1 acre / 1000 population) was fixed by Zila and Upazila Planning project of 
Urban Development Directorate, 1985 for district and upazila level towns of Bangladesh. 
Whereas Hongkong, the most crowded city in the world provides on average 0.71 acres per 1,000 
persons or more than five times the amount proposed by DAP (Preetha, 2011).  
 
 
6. Proposals of Open Space and Green in Khulna City Master Plan and Their 
Implementation 
 
6.1 Open Space and Green Proposals of 1961 Master Plan  
 
As indicated by the 1961 Khulna City Master Plan on an area of 181 sq. km. area for the period 
of 1961-1980, the ratio of open space in the city was only 0.40 acre per 1000 population in 1961. 
There was only 37.10 acres of public open space in the city at that time. The plan recommended 
1566 acres of open space in the form of park, stadium and play field based on a standard of 4 
acres per 1000 population. On review of 1961 Master Plan implementation it is revealed that only 
about 97 acres of open space proposals have so far been implemented which is only 22 percent of 
the total land earmarked as open space. The only major open space proposal implemented is the 
divisional stadium at Boira. Lack of awareness for the need of open space and scarcity of fund 
are found to be the major reasons for failure to implement open space proposals (KDA Master 
Plan, 2001).   
 
6.2  Open Space and Green Proposals of 2001 Master Plan 
 
The Master Plan encompasses those areas of Structure Plan coverage that are apprehended to be 
the most potential for urban growth and agglomeration during the period of ten years (2001-  
917 
 
Table 2: Parks and open space as land use under Khulna City Master Plan 
 
Existing (Acre) Sl. 
No
. 
Land Use 
KCC 
Area 
Extend
ed Area Total 
Percen
t 
Addition
al  
Proposed 
(Acre) 
Master 
Plan 
Total 
(Acre) 
Perce
nt 
  
1. 
Residential  5836.85 10269.90 
16106.7
5 28.13 11632.89 
27739.6
4 48.45 
  
2. 
Mixed 595.90 00.00 595.90 1.04 715.10 1311.00 2.29 
  
3. 
Commercial  415.80 650.00 1065.80 1.86 1159.61 2225.41 3.89 
  
4. 
Industry 815.00 1792.00 2607.00 4.55 1568.12 4175.12 7.29 
  
5. 
Parks and Open 
Space 128.00 51.00 179.00 0.31 1829.00 2008.00 3.51 
  
6. 
Warehouse/Stor
age/Depot 48.00 20.00 68.00 0.12 57.00 125.00 0.22 
  
7. 
Administrative 300.00 443.00 743.00 1.30 26.26 769.26 1.34 
  
8. 
Education and 
Related Use 450.00 350.00 800.00 1.40 287.92 1087.92 1.90 
  
9. 
Healthcare 
Facilities 79.26 88.00 167.26 0.29 140.17 307.43 0.54 
10
. 
Municipal and 
Community 
Facility 
23.37 50.00 73.37 0.13 14.15 87.50 0.15 
11
. 
Transport and 
Terminal 151.00 
2687.0
0 2838.00 4.96 1826.30 4664.30 8.15 
12
. 
Defense / 
Security 80.00 273.00 353.00 0.62 72.42 425.42 0.74 
13
. 
Graveyard/Cem
etery/Cremation 
Ground 
112.00 65.00 177.00 0.31 62.00 239.00 0.42 
14
. 
Brick Field 65.00 429.00 494.00 0.86 18.00 512.00 0.89 
15
. 
Fish Farm 31.00 408.07 439.07 0.77 00.00 439.00 0.77 
16
. 
Waterbody 310.00 346.05 656.05 1.14 00.00 656.05 1.14 
17
. 
Crop field / 
Agriculture / 
Homestead 
1839.19 28045.61 
29884.8
0 52.20 - 
10476.0
0 18.30 
Total 11280.3
7 
45967.
63 
57248.0
0 100.00 19408.94 
57248.0
5 
100.0
0 
Source: KDA Master Plan, 2001 
918 
 
 




Map 1: Proposed and Existing Green Space in Khulna Master Plan, 
2001 
Legend 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Source: KDA Master Plan, 2001. 
919 
 
2010). The plan serves as a basis for development control and overall development of the city. 
The Master Plan covers an area is 231.67 sq. km. area including the KCC area of 45.65 sq. km. 
area. Structure Plan is the second basic document of the plan package, which sets forth the 
spatially translated policy, framework for the future Metro-Khulna for a period of 20 years (2001-
2020). Open space and green is a new but a major land use in city Master Plan. Major open space 
land use provision includes parks, play ground, botanical garden and natural greens. A total of 
2008.00 (3.51%) acre land was proposed for open space use (Table 2). 
   Small-park and play grounds are spread all over the Master Plan. Metropolitan park, natural 
green and botanical garden are put in locations where sufficient vacant land was available for 
such uses (Map 1). 
   Open space in the current Master Plan, combining current and proposed, has been categorized 
as, Metropolitan and Community Level Park; Natural Green and Waterbody/Riverfront Green; 
Roadside green/Urban forest/Garden; and Botanical Garden and Zoo /Amusement Park. 
 
6.3  Metropolitan and Community Level Parks 
 
The main purpose of Metropolitan Park is to serve as a place of passive recreation at city level, 
with centrality of its location. It is extremely difficult to find such a large vacant place within the 
core area of the city that can be used as a Central Park.  
 
Table 3: Proposals and implementation of metropolitan and community level parks 
 
Recommended Implementation 
Phase 
Sl. 
No. 
Park Type with 
Proposed Location 
Area 
(Acre) 
Phase-I  
(2001-2005) 
Phase-II 
(2006-2010) 
Implementation 
Status 
Metropolitan Level Park         
1. Railway Yard, Central 
area of Khulna City 88.42 √ - 
Not 
Implemented 
2. South-east of Central 
Storage Depot (CSD) 
Godown, Boyra 
15.00 √ - Not Implemented 
 Sub-Total 103.42  -  
Community Level Park     
1. Boira, northwest of 
Medical College 
Hospital 
8.00 √ - Not Implemented 
2. Dubi and Baniakhamar, 
in front of Lion’s 
School, Gallamari  
37.00 √ - Not Implemented 
3. Joypur Near/ beside 
Atharobanki River 20.00 √ - 
Not 
Implemented 
4. Mouza Noapara, 
Noapara Town 55.68 √ - 
Not 
Implemented 
5. Mouza Barakpur, 8.20 - √ Not 
920 
 
Dighalia  Implemented 
6. Mouza 
Maheshwarpasha, 
Maheshwarpasha 
17.20 - √ Not Implemented 
7. Mouza Alka, Fultala 16.52 - √ Not Implemented 
8. Mouza Mahakal, North 
Noapara 18.68 - √ 
Not 
Implemented 
Sub-Total  181.28    
Grand Total 284.70    
Source: KDA Master Plan, 2001. 
 
After thorough investigation the Master Plan sited the main metropolitan park within the city 
corporation area at the railway station yard by the side of the Bhairab River. Plenty of land at this 
place is lying unused. There exit about 15 acres of khas land south-east of CSD Godown by the 
railway line. The land is presently lying unused. The Plan also suggested converting the land into 
a metropolitan park with an access road. In absence of large enough land in the central area, there 
is no option but to go for decentralization of parks at community level. Another advantage of 
decentralization is to provide easy access of the local people to park facilities. The size of 
Community Park varies from 8.20 acres to over 32.00 acres. 
 
6.4  Play Ground and Stadium Proposals 
 
Playgrounds are one of the means of active recreation, particularly, for the young. They are 
necessary not only for sound physical and mental growth of the people but also to keep the young 
and the adolescent away from unsociable and antisocial activities. Attempt is made to distribute 
playgrounds all over the Master Plan area to enable local youths to participate in active 
recreation. The Master Plan proposed a total of 10 playgrounds with an intention to provide at 
least one playground for each of the KCC Wards. But in many wards due to high density and 
compact builtupness it was difficult to have adequate vacant land for creating a playground. 
Therefore, the plan proposed playgrounds only in those Wards where sufficient space was found 
available. Based on this principle play ground was provided only in 7 Wards, namely, Ward No. 
3, 4, 17, 18, 21, 24  and 31. The following table shows the location of all the proposed 
playgrounds within the Master Plan area including Khulna City Corporation (KCC) wards. 
   There are two stadiums within the Khulna City Corporation area- one at Boira, named Sheikh 
Abu Naser Stadium and the other at K.D. Ghosh Road, named Khulna Zila Stadium. Area of the 
two stadium is respectively about 14 acres and 5 acres. The K.D Ghosh Road. Stadiums serves 
active recreational needs of the entire city. The stadium at Boira has gallery facilities that serves 
the extended parts of the city. It is also used for staging national and international games and 
sports. Since the Master Plan area extends upto Noapara, the fast growing urban centre of the 
northern region, the plan recommended a stadium at Noapara Mouza on an area of about 16.44 
acres to serve the sports needs of the local community. No proposals are made for large areas of 
rural character on the southeast and northeast, other side of the Bhairab-Rupsa River and in the 
central north parts. Proposals for these areas are left for the period of revision of the Master Plan 
or during phase wise preparation of detailed area plans. Most of these areas are unlikely to be 
921 
 
developed in the immediate future, as there are ample opportunities to meet demand for land by 
in filling of existing built-up areas.  
 
6.5 River Front/Water body Green 
 
A green strip is proposed on the eastern side of the Bhairab opposite Naval Headquarters. A 
larger green is proposed on charlands at Jugihati and Dewaraj Mouzas (opposite of the Port area). 
The area is presently used for fishing. Another two strips of greens are proposed at the Bhairab-
Atai river junction on eastern bank of Bhairab-Atai connecting point at Chandnimahal on an area 
of about 12.00 acres and another 11 acres on the west bank at Goalpara mouza adjacent to the 
Khulna Newsprint Mills. Another about 100 ft. wide green strip on the Bhairab will start from 
KDA Mirerdanga Road and will continue upto Aphil Jute Mills Road. Total area in this strip is 
about 80 acres or 32.38 hectares. Another chunk (21 acres) of green space is proposed by the 
river Bhairab at Barakpur, Dighalia opposite of the Ajax Jute Mills and Sonali Jute Mills. There 
was proposal of green space on either side of the Mayur River upto the Rayermahal starting from 
about 2000 ft. south of the Gallamari Bridge. The green space is reserved on the East Side of 
about 200-ft. width, while on the west the space is proposed for extension upto the bundh. The 
green is proposed for its continuation though Khudi Khal upto proposed Kharnia-Boyra road on 
the extreme northwest. One of the major aims for green space on this river is to protect the river 
from increasing encroachment and pollution caused by riverside developments.  
 
Table 4: Proposals and implementation of playground and stadium  
 
Recommended 
Implementation Phase 
Sl. 
No. 
Playground and Stadium 
with Proposed Location 
Area 
(Acre) 
Phase-I  
(2001-2005) 
Phase-II 
(2006-2010) 
Implementation 
Status 
Stadium    
 
1. Goakhali, Noapara 16.44 √ -  Not 
Implemented 
Sub-Total 16.44   
 
Playground    
 
1.  Labanchara, KCC Ward 
31 
6.37 √ -  Not 
Implemented 
 2.  Krishnanagar 5.50 √ -  Not 
Implemented 
 3.  Boira, KCC Ward 17 5.68 √ -  Not 
Implemented 
 4.  North of Railway yard, 
KCC Ward 21 
6.20 √ -  Not 
Implemented 
 5.  Dubi, KCC Ward 24 6.20 √ -  Not 
Implemented 
 6.  Ramnagar,Rupsa 8.46 - √  Not 
922 
 
Recommended 
Implementation Phase 
Sl. 
No. 
Playground and Stadium 
with Proposed Location 
Area 
(Acre) 
Phase-I  
(2001-2005) 
Phase-II 
(2006-2010) 
Implementation 
Status 
Implemented 
 7.  Brahmmangati, 
Dighalia 
9.64 - √  Not 
Implemented 
 8.  Maheshwarpasa, KCC 
Ward 3 
11.52 - √  Not 
Implemented 
 9.  Alka, West Phultala 7.58 - √  Not 
Implemented 
 10.  Deana, KCC Ward 4 5.50 - √  Not 
Implemented 
 Sub-Total 72.65     
Grand Total 89.09    
Source: KDA Master Plan, 2001. 
 
Table 5: Proposals and implementation of river front/water body green 
 
Recommended Implementation 
Phase 
Sl. 
No. 
River front/Water body 
green with Proposed 
Location 
Area 
(Acre) 
Phase-I  
(2001-2005) 
Phase-II  
(2006-2010) 
Implementati
on Status 
 1. Milki Deara to Dewraj 
Mouza  in east Rupsha 
along the Bhairab 
58.00 √ - Not Implemented 
 2.  From KDA Mirerdanga 
Road on the Bhairab up 
to  to Aphil Jute Mills 
Road 
80.00 √ - Not Implemented 
 3.  Either side of the 
Mayur River up to 
Rayer Mahal starting 
from about 2000 ft. 
south of the Gallamari 
bridge 
85.00 √ - 
Partial is 
under 
Implementati
on by KCC 
 4.  Along River Bhairab at 
Barakpur, Dighalia 
opposite of Ajax Jute 
Mills and Sonali Jute 
Mills 
21.00 - √ Not Implemented 
 5.  Bhairab-Atai River 
junction on eastern bank 
of Bhairab-Atai 
connecting point at 
Chandnimahal 
12.00 - √ Not Implemented 
923 
 
Recommended Implementation 
Phase 
Sl. 
No. 
River front/Water body 
green with Proposed 
Location 
Area 
(Acre) 
Phase-I  
(2001-2005) 
Phase-II  
(2006-2010) 
Implementati
on Status 
 6.  West bank at Goalpara 
mouza near Khulna 
Newsprint Mills 
11.00 - √ Not Implemented 
 Total 267.00    
Source: KDA Master Plan, 2001. 
 
KCC is developing a linear park on 14 acre land along west side of Mayur River just from the 
north of Gallamary Bridge. This park is at the eastern side of Khulna University. KCC has 
established a new park, named KCC Solar Park on 6 acre land in the Sonadanga Second Phase 
Residential Area, a planned residential area developed by KDA in 2007. The park is developed 
on the land reserved for development of lake in the design layout. The park has different types of 
facilities such as 2 sitting umbrellas, 3 slippers, 14 sitting benches, 3 gates and public toilet. 
There is a lake in the middle having 6 landing points (ghats), 1 water pump house of Khulna 
WASA, Khulna Renewable Energy Production Workshop & Training Centre in the park. The 
park is used as cricket ground by local children and adolescents. Internal road and drainage 
condition of the park is good. Nearby city people use the park as the place for jogging and 
passing leisure time in morning and evening. KCC has developed another park like amusement 
spot at the northern side of Bastuhara colony in Muzgunni area in 1999. It is situated in the Ward 
no-9. In the area, there is a lake owned by KCC. KCC has placed 6 sitting umbrellas with round 
benches and eight sitting benches at the eastern bank of the lake. 
 
6.6 Urban Forest/ Green Belt along Primary Roads/Garden 
 
As a city grows it gradually becomes a jumble of bricks and concrete. The green areas can bring 
relief to the overcrowded and monotonous urban environment. They serve as breathing places 
and bring ecological balance. Besides, they can also serve as a means to conservation, protection 
and control of nature. One location is in Dubi and Kholabaria mouza at the southern end of the 
city beside Rupsa Bridge Bypass road. Another chunk was proposed at Rayermahal and Beel 
Pabla area at Boyra. The third location for urban forest was on the railway land in between Old 
Jessore Road and Railway line at the west of Khalishpur. Here a small strip of about 15 acres 
are identified for urban forest. The first two places are comparatively lower and used for 
seasonal crop cultivation, while the third area has higher elevation. Two green strips are proposed 
along both sides of the proposed Rupsa Bridge Bypass Road from Khulna-Mongla road 
connecting point upto Fultala. From Fultala to Noapara the green belt goes by the western side of 
the road only. The strips on each side will be 100 ft. wide from right of way of the road. The total 
area under roadside green is proposed to be about 686 acres (Table 6).  
 
6.7  Botanical Garden and Zoo-cum Park 
 
About 71 acres (8 hac.) of land is earmarked on the northeastern corner of Fultala, by the corner 
of the Bhairab River for a Botanical garden. Fultala is nationally renowned for its nursery culture, 
wherefrom variety plants one exported throughout the country. A botanical garden in this area is 
924 
 
Table 6: Proposals and implementation of roadside green belt 
 
Recommended Implementation 
Phase 
Sl. 
No. 
Roadside Green Belt with 
Proposed Location 
Area 
(Acre) 
Phase-I  
(2001-2005) 
Phase-II 
(2006-2010) 
Implementation 
Status 
 1. Both sides of Rupsha 
Bridge Bypass Road 
from Khulna-Mongla 
road connecting point to 
Fultala (Primry Road P-
1) 
Western side of the 
Jessore-Khulna Road 
from Fultala to Noapara  
(Primary Road P-1 & P-
2) 
616.00 √  Not Implemented 
 2.  3. Barakpur 15.00  √ Not Implemented 
 3.  Primary Road P-3 & P-4 55.60  √ Not Implemented 
 Sub-Total 686.60    
Source: KDA Master Plan, 2001. 
 
considered befitting to its biological, social and economic environment. Gilatala is the only zoo-
cum park for Khulna city. The plan had proposal for its extension to the south for making a full-
fledged zoo with park with financial support from the government. Management should remain 
with cantonment. The area of the establishment is proposed to be further extended to the south 
where there is plenty of vacant land. The extension can be made on about 48.00 acres.  
 
Table 7: Proposals and implementation of urban forest/botanical garden/zoo cum park 
 
Recommended Implementation 
Phase 
Sl. 
No. 
Urban Forest/Botanical 
Garden/Zoo cum Park 
with Proposed Location 
Area 
(Acre) 
Phase-I  
(2001-2005) 
Phase-II  
(2006-2010) 
Implementatio
n Status 
Urban Forest     
1.  Dubi and Kholabaria 
mouza at southern end 
of Khulna city beside 
Rupsha Bridge Bypass 
218.61 √  Not Implemented 
 2. Between Old Jessore 
Road and Railway Line 
at the west of 
Khalishpur (Railway 
land) 
15.00 √  Not Implemented 
925 
 
Recommended Implementation 
Phase 
Sl. 
No. 
Urban Forest/Botanical 
Garden/Zoo cum Park 
with Proposed Location 
Area 
(Acre) 
Phase-I  
(2001-2005) 
Phase-II  
(2006-2010) 
Implementatio
n Status 
 3.  Rayer Mahal and Beel 
Pabla area at Boira  190.00  √ 
Not 
Implemented 
 Sub-Total 423.61    
Botanical Garden and Zoo cum 
Park     
 1.  Botanical Garden at 
Fultala (On the 
northeastern corner of 
Fultala, by the corner of 
the River Bhairab) 
71.00  √ Not Implemented 
2. Zoo cum Park at 
Gilatala (Extension of 
the Banobilas Zoo cum 
Park to its south vacant 
land)   
48.00  √ Not Implemented 
Sub-Total  119.00    
Grand Total 542.61    
Source: KDA Master Plan, 2001. 
 
7.  Reasons for Slow and Non-Implementation of the Open Space and Green Proposals 
 
Following are the reasons for slow and non-implementation of the open space and green 
proposals of Khulna City Master Plan: 
 Late starting of formulation of the Detailed Area Plan for Khulna Master Plan area i.e. KDA 
has started its DAP project in 2009, whereas there was an indication of its formulation in the 
Master Plan by 2005. If the DAP was formulated in due time there was possibilities and 
provision of implementation of the proposals of open space and green.  
 Absence of review and revision of the Master Plan 2001 by KDA inspite of having the 
provision of review and revision of the Master Plan after every five year. KDA did not 
review and revised the master plan in 2005 and 2010. The period of the Master Plan 2001 has 
been expired in 2010.   
 No pressure to concerned authority i.e. KDA, KCC and Department of Forest (DoF) by the 
pressure group and general city people. 
 Lack of coordination and initiatives of KDA-KCC and other organizations for review of the 
open space and green proposals of Khulna City Master Plan and thereby design project 
proposals for their implementation. 
 Lack of awareness of city people and concerned organizations on the needs of open space and 
green in city life and the roles and responsibilities of KDA-KCC-DoF regarding creation of 
open space and greens 
926 
 
 Lack of commitment of political leaders and policy makers as the political leaders and policy 
makers give less priority towards adequate budgetary allocation for the Khulna area and 
Khulna city 
 Scarcity of fund of concerned organizations i.e. KDA, KCC, DoF, DoE and others for 
establishing parks and open space. 
 Inadequate institutional set up of KDA and KCC mainly with urban planners, architects and 
civil engineers who are technically and academically motivated towards the needs and 
provision of open space and greens for the city people foe physical, mental and 
environmental wellbeing 
8.   Recommendations for Implementation of the Open Space and Green Proposals 
Following recommendations are made for implementation of city open space and green proposals 
at satisfactory level for recreational, health and environmental development of Khulna City: 
 The government and the general city people should realize the value of open space and take 
appropriate steps to create new spaces and conserve the existing ones. 
 The organizations mainly KCC and KDA should acquire the vacant and non-built up areas 
which are generally proposed for parks and open space to gradually develop parks over the 
years. It will resist the uncontrolled development by the private land owners. It will also 
lower the acquisition cost and make the land available for parks and open space.  
 KDA should take necessary steps to convince KCC to follow the City Master Plan prepared 
by KDA. 
 KDA should supply the copy of Master Plans to KCC, its Councilors, other concerned 
government organizations, NGOs and CBOs to make the pressure and aware on the 
necessities of parks and open space. Steps can be made to make available of the Master Plans 
to different offices, officials and staffs related with city/town planning development and 
research organizations. 
 Creation of pressure group by the community and city people to put pressure to government 
for creation of new parks and open space and conserve the existing ones. 
 Regular review of the Master Plan and the proposals and implementation of parks and open 
spaces is important. 
 Special fund can be created for establishing parks and open space. 
 More technical manpower i.e. urban planners, architects and civil engineers to be recruited in 
KCC, KDA, Pourashava and Upazila level under the KDA Master Plan area to assign them to 
work for parks and open space along with other activities related with the city planning and 
implementation. 
 Provision of more local level small parks can be kept in suitable areas during revision of the 
plan and preparation of Detailed Area Plans. Parks can also be created on riverside green and 
forest areas reserved in the Master Plan. Strict controls should be exercised not to allow any 
development on the designated sites of river/water bodies till the lands are taken over for 
execution of open space development projects. Only agriculture or forest related activities 
may be allowed for the interim period. Khulna Development Authority and Khulna City 
Corporation can control and monitor such developments using such instrument as Khulna 
927 
 
Master Plan, EBBC Act, 1952 and KDA Ordinance and other legal powers and executive 
orders. 
 Adequate open space standards should be developed by KDA, NHA, LGED, City 
Corporations, Pourashavas and other public-private agencies and adopt the same during 
preparation of their respective housing estate layout plans.  
 
9.  Conclusion 
 
Open space and greens in the form of parks, stadiums, playgrounds, botanical gardens, zoo, 
roadside green, riverfront green and urban forest are one of the basic urban amenities for any 
modern city. Khulna, the third largest industrial and second largest port divisional city of 
Bangladesh is now in the position of gradual growth and expansion. But, there is no metropolitan 
or regional level park within the City Master Plan area. At the same time the need for open space 
and green for the existing and future population can not be ignored. Though a number of open 
space and green proposals were made in the 1961 and 2001 Khulna City Master Plan, their level 
of implementation is quite unsatisfactory. Khulna Development Authority and Khulna City 
Corporation are mainly responsible in implementing the green and open space proposals of 
Khulna City Master Plan. These two organizations along with others should take necessary steps 
to implement the open space and green proposals using the instruments of their development 
control regulations and development programmes and projects for the recreational, health and 
environmental development of Khulna City.  
References 
Khan, Syed Imam, (2006) `Clinical Waste Management in Khulna City Corporation Area’ an 
unpublished dissertation, Department of Urban and Regional Planning, BUET, Dhaka.   
Master Plan of KDA 2001. Structure Plan, Master Plan and Detailed Area Plan for Khulna City, 
Volume III,  Approved version 2002 (Aqua-Sheltech Consortium). 
Population Census-2001, Community Series, Zilla: Khulna. BBS, Planning Division, Ministry of 
Planning, GOB 
Rangawala, S.C. Rangawala, K.S. and Rangawala, P.S. (1998),  Town Planning, New Delhi: 
Charotar Publishing House 
Structure Plan of KDA 2001. Structure Plan, Master Plan and Detailed Area Plan for Khulna 
City, Volume II, Approved version 2002 (Aqua-Sheltech Consortium). 
Sushmita S Preetha (December 9, 2011), The Daily Star weekend Magazine, Dhaka.  
928 
 
 ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
DEFLECTION OF CYCLONE TRACK IN BAY OF BENGAL 
 
 
Nikhil Chandra Sarkar1, Anowarul Islam2 and Sujit Kumar Debsarma3 
 
 
ABSTRACT: Storm surges associated with intense tropical cyclones originating in the nothern 
trip of the Bay of Bengal are responsible for major devastation along the coastal regions of 
Bangladesh.The most of the severe tropical cyclones are formed over in the Bay of Bengal due to 
its complex geometrical structure and shallow bathymetry along the coastal zone.These types of 
natural disasters generate a significant impacts on our lives as well as our environment. In order 
to quantify the impacts of such disaster, we analyized the cyclone track considering the time 
duration of cyclones. The sustainability of this model is varified when the results obtained from 
the model are in good agreement with the reported data.This model requires meteorological and 
hydrological inputs such as the position of the storm centre, the radius of maximum wind, 
pressure drop and bathymetry data. A numerical model is used to simulate the surge height due to 
severe cyclone. The system can be operated on a PC or a workstation with Linux/Unix operating 
system. Recently Windows version of IIT Storm Surge Model is developed at IIT Delhi. The 
results obtained from the model are in good agreement with the reported data. 
 
Keywords: Bay of Bengal, cyclone, bathymetry, coastal zone, grid system, shallow water, 
simulation 
 
  
1. Introduction  
 
The Bay of Bengal is a region of the world frequently affected by storm surges associated with 
tropical cyclones. Statistics show that about 5% of the global tropical cyclones form over the Bay 
of Bengal (Fig.1). On average, five to six storms form in this region every year, but with 80% of 
the global casualties. 
Storm surge is an extreme overflow of sea water on coastal region by the force of strong winds due 
to low pressure weather system. The storm surge is a long wave which increases the sea water level 
during the cyclone as well as tide. t may exist from few minutes to several days depending on the 
cyclone size and speed of movement. 
                                                        
1Faculty, Department of Mathematics, International University of Business Agriculture and Technology, 
Dhaka-1230, Bangladesh, email: nikhil_cs48@yahoo.com 
2 Professor, Department of Mathematics, Shahjalal University of Science and Technology, Sylhet-
3114, Bangladesh, email: mislam32@gmail.com 
3Scientist, Theoretical Division, SAARC Meteorological Research Centre, Dhaka-1207, Bangladesh, 
email:sujit.desarma@gmail.com  
929 
 
 
 
Figure1: Map showing global distribution of tropical storms (TC) 
 
I Classification of tropical disturbance in the Bay of Bengal (Bangladesh perspective) is shown in 
Table 1. Of all the countries surrounding the Bay of Bengal, Bangladesh suffers most from storm 
surges. The main factors contributing to disastrous surges in Bangladesh may be summarized as 
(Ali 1979) 
(a) shallow coastal water, (b) significant pressure fall, (c) coastal geometry and convergence 
of the bay, (d) high astronomical tides, (e) thickly populated low-lying islands, (f) 
favourable cyclone track, and (g) numerous number of inlets including world’s largest 
river system (Ganga–Brahmaputra–Meghna). 
 
Table 1: Classification of tropical disturbances in the Bay of Bengal (Bangladesh perspective) 
 
Sl. No.       Disturbance        Corresponding Wind Speed 
 1. Low pressure area  Less than 17 knots (31 km/h) 
 2. Well-marked low 17-21 knots (31-40 km/h) 
 3. Depression 22-27 knots (41-51 km/h) 
 4. Deep depression 28-33 knots (52-61 km/h) 
 5. Cyclonic storm 34-47 knots (62-88 km/h) 
 6. Severe cyclonic storm 48-63 knots (89-117km/h) 
 7. Severe cyclonic storm with a 
core of hurricane winds  
64-119 knots (118-221 km/h) 
 
 8. Super cyclone  120 knots (222 km/h) or above 
 
930 
 
Bangladesh is suffered by Tropical Cyclones almost every year. Eighty percent of the global 
causalities occur in Bangladesh due to complex coastal geometry of the northern tip of the Bay of 
Bengal. 
 
1. Track of Tropical Cyclones 
 
Bangladesh suffers from devastating tropical cyclones and cyclonic storm surges frequently. 
When cyclones make landfall, the northern portion of the Bay of Bengal causes storm surge. 
During the period from 1960 to 2009, twenty seven (27) cyclones hit the coast of Bangladesh. 
Tracks of major cyclones crossed Bangladesh coast during in the 20th century is shown in Fig. 
(2). Cyclone "SIDR" was one of the 10 strongest cyclones to hit Bangladesh between 1876 and 
2007. It was born in Bay of Bengal on 11th, November, 2007 and intensified into a category 4 
storm system (on the Saffir-Simpson Scale) with peak sustained winds of up to 215 km/h (135 
mp/h) (peaking at 260 km/hour).  
 
 
Figure 2: Tracks of major cyclones crossed Bangladesh coast.  
 
The cyclone made landfall in Bangladesh in the evening of November 15, 2007. SIDR and its 
surge resulted in thousands of deaths and massive destruction of coastal communities.  The 
actual path of cyclone SIDR is shown in Fig. (3). The cyclone "AILA", crossed the coast of west 
Bengal-Khulna (Bangladesh) coast near sagar island of India and lay centered at west Bengal and 
adjoining western part of Bangladesh. Late on 21 May 2009, the joint typhoon warning center 
931 
 
reported that a tropical disturbance had persisted about 950 kilometers to the south of Kolkata 
and had developed within the southwest monsoon. During 22 May 2009, the disturbance 
developed as a depression and slowly intensifies as a deep depression to the next day. AILA 
became a severe cyclonic storm at 06UTC on May 25 and made landfall at its peak intensity. The 
cyclone April, 1991 struck the coastal region of Bangladesh causing a massive storm surge and 
widespread flooding.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3: Track of cyclone SIDR, 2007 (BMD) 
 
Although cyclones frequently hit in this region, this cyclone was one of the strongest cyclones in 
the history of Bangladesh. The 260 km/hr wind speed caused more than 6 meter high storm surge 
that flooded a large area of the coastal region of the country.  
 
 
2. Methodology 
 
3.1. Fundamental Equations 
For numerical treatment, it is convenient to express the governing equations in flux form as  
932 
 
                                                       (1) 
 
          (2)                                    
        
           (3)                                 
Where   and    are new prognostic variables and  
gives the total depth of the basin.  
The equation of continuity (1) along with the two momentum equations (2) and (3) form the three 
basic equations of the numerical model. It consists of a set of three coupled equations for the 
three unknowns  and  .  If the terms in these three equations arise out of (i) Coriolis 
terms, (ii) the inverted barometric effect i.e.  and    due to fall in atmospheric pressure, 
(iii) the component of wind stress (  ), and  (iv) the bottom stress component (  ) 
could be specified by meteorological data and the geometry of the continental shelf then the 
problem would be solved by numerical integration. The response in the sea at any instant       
then determines the surge heights. 
 
3.2. Boundary and Initial Conditions 
 
Theoretically the only boundary condition needed in the vertically integrated system is that the 
normal transport vanish at the coast, that is , 
       for all   for all                     (4)                                             
where α denotes the inclination of the outward directed normal to the x-axis. It then follows that 
 along the y-directed boundaries and  along the x-directed boundaries.  
At the open- sea boundary, the normal currents across the boundary may be prescribed, yielding a 
condition such as (4) modified by a non-zero term on the right hand side of the equation. 
Alternatively, a radiation type of condition may be applied, which leads to (Heaps, 1973) 
           (5)                                           
Application of a radiation type of condition (4) at the open sea boundary of a model allows the 
propagation of energy (disturbances) only outwards from the interior  in the form of simple 
progressive waves. It also helps to eliminate the transient response more quickly as a result of the 
933 
 
frictional dissipation in the system. Flather (1976) noted that application of a radiation condition 
in the numerical model may remove the unrealistically large currents and grid scale oscillations 
in the vicinity of the open boundary, which may be produced by the application of conventional 
open-sea boundary condition (i.e.,    at y = 0).  
As usual it is assumed that the motion in the sea is generated from an initial state of rest, so that  
      everywhere for         (6)   
                                                                              
3.3. Cyclone of April, 1991 
 
The Chittagong cyclone of 29 April 1991 was first detected as a depression on 23rd April 1991 
from satellite imagery (NOAA-11) located at latitude 10.0o N and longitude 89.0oE at 0900 BST 
in the morning of 25 April (Fig. 4).  
   The system again intensified into a deep depression in the evening and very quickly turned 
into a cyclonic storm at midnight on 25 April. The time series of the 1991 cyclone is shown in 
table 4.1. The maximum sustained wind speed was 65-87 km/h, having a central pressure of 996 
Mb. It retained this intensity till 1500 BST of 27 April when it was found to have developed into 
a severe cyclonic storm. The maximum wind velocity was 90-115 km/h, having 990 Mb as the 
central pressure. 
   On the same day (27 April) at midnight, it turned into a storm with a core of hurricane wind 
that had wind speeds of more than 130 km/h. From 28 April, it started moving in a north-easterly 
direction and finally, crossed the coast north of Chittagong port in the early morning (0400 BST) 
of 30 April. The track of the April cyclone, 1991 is shown in figure 5 and the time series for the 
1991 cyclone is given in table 2. The estimated maximum pressure drop was about 60 Mb 
(Talukdar et al., 1992). The maximum wind speed observed at Sandwip was 235 km/h. The 
central pressure of the 1991 cyclone was as low as 938 Mb, as measured by the Chittagong port 
authority of Bangladesh. The storm surge was 4 to 8 meter high in different areas. Vast areas in 
the districts of Cox's Bazar, Chittagong, Noakhali, and Bhola were submerged. Fatality figures 
caused by the April cyclone varies between 130,000 (Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics, 1991) to 
200,000 (Rashid,1991).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4: Satellite show of Bangladesh cyclone April, 1991(BMD) 
934 
 
 
Figure 5: Observed track of cyclonic storm of April, 1991. 
 
   Casualties in the unprotected islands were on the average 40-50% of the total population of 
the areas affected by the storm surge. Islands protected by embankments, the figure may have 
been 30-40%; while on the mainland coast, which faced the fury of the surge, deaths were 
probably 20-30% of the population. 
 
Table 2: Time series for the positions and the nature of the April 1991 cyclone (Source: BMD) 
 
Date Hour (UTC) Latitude (0E) Longitude (0N) Nature of the storm 
2604 1800 11.00 87.50 Cyclonic storm 
2704 0000 11.80 87.50 Cyclonic storm 
2704 0900 12.50 87.50 Cyclonic storm 
2704 1200 13.00 87.50 Cyclonic storm 
2704 1500 13.60 87.50 Severe cyclonic storm 
2804 0000 14.50 87.50 Severe cyclonic storm 
with hurricane core 
2804 1200 15.80 87.70 Severe cyclonic storm 
with hurricane core 
2804 1400 16.50 88.00 Severe cyclonic storm 
935 
 
with hurricane core 
2904 0000 17.60 88.30 Severe cyclonic storm 
with hurricane core 
2904 1200 19.80 88.40 Severe cyclonic storm 
with hurricane core 
2904 1800 20.80 88.50 Severe cyclonic storm 
with hurricane core 
3004 0000 22.00 91.00 Severe cyclonic storm 
with hurricane core 
3004 0200 22.30 92.80 Severe cyclonic storm 
with hurricane core 
 
3.4. Cyclone Aila, 2009 
A low formed over South-West Bay and adjoining area at noon of 21 May 2009, moved 
northwards and intensified into a well marked low south-west Bay and adjoining west central 
Bay on 23 May (Fig.6). Slightly moving north-westwards, the system again intensified into a 
depression near 16.00 N and 88.00 E at 0900 UTC on the same day.  
   Maximum sustained wind speed within 44 kms of the depression centre was about 40 kPh 
rising to 50 kPh. It became a deep depression near 17.80 N and 88.60 E at 0600 UTC on May 24 
and intensified into a cyclonic storm “AILA”(EPC 994 hPa) at 1200 UTC near 18.30 N and 88.60 
E on the same day. The cyclonic storm “AILA” moved slightly northwards over the same area 
centered at 0300 UTC near 18.60 N and 88.60 E on the same day. Finally, the cyclonic storm 
“AILA” started to cross West Bengal- Khulna (Bangladesh) coast near Sagar ilands of India and 
moving continuously northwards it completely crossed the west Bengal-Khulna (Bangladesh) 
coast on May 26. The track of the cyclonic storm “AILA” associated rainfall wind distributions 
are given in figure 7. The time series of the cyclone AILA, 2009 is shown in table 3. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6: Satellite show of AILA, 2009 over India and Bangladesh (BMD). 
936 
 
Table 3: Time series for the positions and the nature of the cyclone AILA, 2009 
 
Date Hour (UTC) Latitude (0E Longitude (0N) Nature of the storm 
2305 0900 16.00 88.00 Depression 
2305 1500 16.50 88.00 Depression 
2405 0000 17.20 88.30 Depression 
2405 0600 17.80 88.60 Deep depression 
2405 0900 17.80 88.60 Deep depression 
2405 
2405 
1200 
1800 
18.30 
18.80 
88.60 
88.60 
Cyclonic storm 
Cyclonic storm 
2405 2100 19.20 88.60 Cyclonic storm 
2505 
2505 
0000 
0300 
19.40 
20.00 
88.60 
88.60 
Cyclonic storm 
Cyclonic storm 
2505 0600 21.60 88.30 Cyclonic storm 
 
 
Maritime port of Mongla and the coastal districts of Bhola, Barisal, Patuakhali, Borguna, 
Pirozpur, Jhalokathi, Bagerhat, Khulna, Satkhira, Jessore and their offshore islands and chars 
were under danger signal no. seven. On the other hand maritime ports of chittagong and cox’s 
bazar and the coastal districts of cox’s bazar, chittagong, noakhali, feni, laxmipur, comilla, 
chandpur and their offshore islands and chars were under danger signal number six. A maximum 
surge of about 06-08 ft was predicted to low lying areas of Bangladesh coast. 
 
 
Figure 7: Observed track of cyclonic storm “AILA”, May 2009 (BMD). 
23,09UTC  
23,21UTC  
24,00UTC  
24,06UTC  
24,12UTC  
24,18UTC  
25,00UTC  
25,03UTC  
25,06UTC  
25,12UTC  
  D  
  D  
  D  
  DD  
  CS  
  CS  
  CS  
  CS  
  CS  
937 
 
4. Results and Discussion 
 
4.1 Cyclone of April, 1991 
Due to the cyclone April, 1991 we have found the higher surge height in terms of air bubble at 
different locations in the coastal region of Bangladesh. At Hiron point the maximum surge height 
without air bubbles is 3.01m whereas the surge height is 3.05m when void fraction is 30% and  
Time in hours (28-30 April, 1991) 
Figure 8: Computed water levels with respect to the mean sea level at Hiron point of Ba
 -ngladesh with 0 0.3C  and 7.00 C  associated with the cyclone April, 1991. 
 
Time in hours (28-30 April, 1991) 
Figure 9: Computed water levels with respect to the mean sea level at Kuakata of Bang
l-adesh with 0 0.3C  and 7.00 C  associated with the cyclone April, 1991. 
 
938 
 
with 70% void fraction the surge height is 3.10m (Fig.8). So, 1.33% sea level rise due to 30% 
void fraction and 2.99% sea level rise for 70% void fraction. 
   At kuakata the maximum surge height is 3.52m whereas the surge height with 30% air 
bubbles is 3.57m and with 70% air bubbles the surge height is 3.63m (Fig.9).  So, 1.42% sea 
level rise due to 30% void fraction and 3.13% sea level rise for 70% void fraction. 
 
4.2. Cyclone of April, 1991 
 
We have found the higher surge height in terms of air bubble at different locations in the coastal 
region of Bangladesh due to cyclone AILA, 2009. At the Hiron point the maximum surge height 
without air bubbles is 2.87m whereas the surge height with 30% void fraction is 2.90m and with 
70% void fraction the surge height is 2.94m (Fig.10). So, 1.05% sea level rise due to 30% void 
fraction and 2.44% sea level rise for 70% void fraction. 
 
Time in hours (24-25 May, 2009) 
Figure 10: Computed water levels with respect to the mean sea level at Hiron point of 
Bangladesh with 0 0.3C  and 7.00 C  associated with the storm AILA, 2009. 
 
Time in hours (24-25 May, 2009) 
Figure 11: Computed water levels with respect to the mean sea level at Kuakata point of 
Bangladesh with 0 0.3C  and 7.00 C  associated with the storm AILA, 2009. 
939 
 
  At Kuakata the maximum surge height without air bubbles is 2.53m whereas the surge height 
with 30% void fraction is 2.55m and with 70% void fraction the surge height is 2.58m (Fig.11). 
So, 0.8% sea level rise due to 30% void fraction and 1.98% sea level rise for 70% void fraction. 
5. Conclusion 
In this paper we have simulated the storm surges due to cyclones AILA, 2009 and the Bangladesh 
cyclone of April, 1991 considering air bubbles effects during wave breaking in the surf zone. The 
simulation is made at some coastal and island location of Bangladesh. The model simulation 
result is found to be reasonable. The model can be found to simulate higher water levels in the 
presence of air bubbles. That is, it was observed that approximately 1.5%-3.5% water level 
increases with the increasing of void fraction from 10%-70% associated with AILA, 2009 and 
approximately 2%-4.5% water level increases with the increasing of void fraction from 10%-70% 
associated with the cyclone April, 1991. The results are in good agreement with the reported post 
storm survey information. 
 
 
References 
 
Ali, A. (1979). Storm surges in the Bay of Bengal and some related problems, PhD thesis, 
University of Reading, England. 
Flather, R.A. and Davies, A.M., (1976). Note on a preliminary scheme for storm surge prediction 
using numerical models. Quart. J. R. Met. Soc., 102, 123-132. 
Heaps, N.S., (1973). Three-dimensional numerical model of the Irish sea, Geophys.J. Astron. 
Soc. 35: 99-120. 
Rashid,H.E. (1991). Geography of Bangladesh, 2nd edition, University Press, Dhaka, 87-88 
Talukdar, J.; Roy, G.D. and Ahmed, M. (1992). Living with cyclone, Community Development 
library, Dhaka, 86-102. 
940 
 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
REGIONAL ASPECT OF FLOOD FORECASTING AND WARNING SERVICES AND 
ITS IMPACT ON THE FLOOD DISASTER MANAGEMENT IN BANGLADESH: AN 
OVERVIEW 
 
 
Md. Sazzad Hossain 1,  Md. Amirul Hossain2  ,  A k M Saif Uddin 1 and Md. Abul Basher 1 
 
 
ABSTRACT: Flood is a common natural disaster in Bangladesh.  Belong to lower riparian 
country it is affected by flood almost every year. All the three major river systems – Ganges- 
Brahmaputra- Meghna River pass through Bangladesh.  Total flood control is neither possible nor 
feasible. So people are habituated to live with flood. Flood disaster can be managed by structural 
measures as well non-structural measures. Among the non-structural measures Flood Forecasting 
and Warning Services (FFWS) plays most significant role in reducing flood damage. In this case 
Regional cooperation is one of the principal factor for a lower riparian country like Bangladesh. 
In the regional cooperation neighbouring countries exchange flood related information among 
themselves. This paper reflects the existing condition of cooperation on the flood related 
hydrological information of Bangladesh and its adjacent friendly neighboring countries. A 
comparison of flood hydrograph between two points of the Brahmaputa River is done to how the 
currently received data is helping in the flood forecasting disaster management in Bangladesh. 
Some other approach of regional activities like GBM Basin Model, SAARC and ICMOD are also 
discussed in this paper.  
1.  Introduction 
Bangladesh is the lowest riparian of world’s three great river basins: the Ganges, the 
Brahmaputra and the Meghna (GBM Basins) covering a combined total catchment area of about 
1.7 million sq. km. extending over Bhutan, China, India and Nepal, flow through Bangladesh 
Figure 1.  Only 7% (Table 1) of this huge catchment area lies in Bangladesh and 93% outside the 
country. The annual flow volume of the rivers is to the tune of 1200 billion m3, and 80% of the 
flow passes during June to September to the sea which if impounded on our Flood Plain would 
have about 9 metres deep standing water (FFWC, 2007).  
   The country has an average rainfall of about 2300 mm; the range can be 1500 mm to 5000 mm. 
Bangladesh has also a unique coast line, conical in shape, which causes a significant increase in 
sea level during monsoon period. Due to the unique topography, river system and rainfall pattern, 
flood occurs in Bangladesh almost every year and devastating ones in every 5 to 10 years 
interval. In flood management, Bangladesh has taken many structural and non-structural 
                                                        
1  Sub-Divisional Engineer, Flood Forecasting and Warning Centre, BWDB, sazz176@yahoo.com 
2  Executive Engineer, Flood Forecasting and Warning Centre, BWDB, amirulbd63@yahoo.com 
941 
 
measures.Flood forecasting and warning is very effective nonstructural measure which mainly 
based on information dissemination.  
 
 
Figure 1 Basin Map of the Ganges, the Brahmaputra, and the Meghna River (Source: JRC, 
Bangladesh. www.jrcb.gov.bd) 
   Hydrological information from the upper catchments is always important for longer lead-time 
in flood forecasting. Due to lower riparian country, hydrological information from the outside 
basin of Bangladesh plays vital role in the flood forecasting activities. Flood Forecasting and 
Warning Centre (FFWC) under the Bangladesh Water Development Board (BWDB) is working 
as the national focal point with respect to monitoring and disseminating of flood warning 
messages to BWDB’s field offices and related organizations from the very beginning.  FFWC 
receives hydrological information from all over the country for flood forecasting purposes. 
FFWC also receives hydro meteorological information from neighbouring countries. Based on 
this information FFWC operates hydrodynamic model to get forecast water level. 
   This paper mainly focuses on the aspect of existing flood forecasting systems which includes 
data availability from the outside Bangladesh, usages of the data. This paper also discusses some 
aspect of regional cooperation like SAARC Disaster Frame Work and International Centre for 
Integrated Mountain Development (ICMOD) for the flood monitoring activities.  
 
2. The River System 
 
The river system of Bangladesh is one of the most extensive in the world, and the Ganges and the 
Brahmaputra are amongst the largest rivers on earth in terms of catchment size, river length and 
discharge. There are more than 300 rivers in Bangladesh of which 57 are transboundary rivers. 
Out of the 57 transboundary rivers, 54 are common with India and remaining 3 with Myanmar. 
The life and livelihood of the millions of people of Bangladesh have been revolving around 
waters of these rivers over the ages. 
942 
 
Table1 Major Rivers and Catchment Areas (Source: Joint River Commission Bangladesh) 
 
Catchment Area (Sq. Km.) Rivers Total 
Catchment 
Area 
(sq.km.) India Nepal  Bhutan China Bangladesh 
Brahmaputra 552000 195000  47000 270900 39100 
Ganges 1087300 860000 147480  
 
- 33520 46300 
Meghna 82000 47000 - - - 35000 
 1721300 
(100%) 
1102000 
(64.02%) 
147480 
(8.57%) 
47000 
(2.73%) 
304420 
(17.69%) 
120400 
(7%) 
 
The Brahmaputra (Jamuna) above Bahadurabad has a length of approximately 2,900 km and a 
catchment area about 5,83,000 sq. km. It rises in glaciers in the northernmost range of the 
Himalayas and flows east far above half its length across the Tibetan plateau. In the complex 
mountain terrain bordering north-east India and China it bends through a series of gorges and is 
joined by a number of major tributaries, e.g., the Dihang and the Luhit before entering its broad 
valley section in Assam. This stretch is about 720 km long to the border of Bangladesh and 
throughout most of this, the course is braided. This braided channel is continued to the 
confluence with the Ganges. 
   Within Bangladesh, the Brahmaputra receives four major Right Bank tributaries- the 
Dudkumar, the Dharla, the Teesta and the Hurasagar. The first three are flashy rivers, rising in 
steep catchments on the southern side of the Himalayan between Darjeeling and Bhutan. The 
Hurasagar river is the outlet to the complex Karatoa-Atrai system, which comprises much of the 
internal drainage of northwest of Bangladesh.The Old Brahmaputra is the main left-bank 
distributary of the Brahmaputra presently known as the Jamuna. The shift of courses appears to 
have been taken place after a major earthquake and catastrophic floods in 1787. The Ganges has a 
total length of about 2,600 km to its confluence with the Brahmaputra and a catchment area of 
approximately 9,07,000 sq. km. Also rising in glaciers in the high western Himalayans, the 
Ganges has a short mountain course of about 160-km. From there it flows south easterly in a vast 
plain being joined by major tributaries from the southern Himalayans in Nepal and by smaller 
rivers from the central Indian Plateau to the south.About having a sinuous deep-water channel 
with numerous bar formations (chars), the Ganges is not braided. After its confluence with the 
Brahmaputra at Goalundo, the river, now known as the Padma, flows in a wide, straight, trench 
like channel. At Chandpur, the Padma is joined by the Meghna from whence it flows to the sea 
and is fully under the influence of tides.Meghna system originates in the hills of Shillong and 
Meghalaya of India. The main source is the BarakRiver, which has a considerable catchment in 
the ridge and valley terrain of eastern Assam bordering Burma. On reaching the border with 
Bangladesh at Amalshid in Sylhet district, it bifurcates to form the Surma and the Kushiyara 
rivers. The Surma, flowing on the north of the Sylhet basin receives Right Bank tributaries from 
943 
 
Khasia and Jaintia Hills of Shillong. These are steep, highly flashy rivers, originating in one of 
the wettest area of the world, the average annual rainfall at Cherrapunji at Assam being about 
10,000 mm. The Kushiyara receives left bank tributaries from the Tripura Hills, the principal 
ones being the Manu. Although also prone to producing flash floods the lesser elevations and 
rainfall of Tripura makes these rivers less violent than the northern streams.Between the Surma 
and Kushiyara, there are a complex of internal draining depressions (haors), meandering flood 
channels and abandoned river courses, which are widely flooded every monsoon season. The two 
rivers rejoined at Markuli and flow via Bhairab as the Meghna to join the Padma at Chandpur. 
The major tributaries of any size outside the Sylhet basin are the Gumtiand the KhowaiRiver, 
which rises in Tripura and other hilly streams from Meghalaya and Assam to join the Meghna. 
   The streams of the southeast region are all short and of a flashy nature, rising in the Chittagong 
Hill Tracts or adjacent parts of eastern India. The main streams are the Muhuri, Halda, Sangu, 
Matamuhuri etc. 
 
3. Existing Data Exchange  
 
At present time Flood Forecasting and Warning Centre (FFWC) is receiving flood related data 
form India, Nepal and China. This data are being used in flood forecasting activities. Figure 2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2  Hydro meteorological Stations outside of Bangladesh relevant to Flood Forecasting 
Activities 
 
944 
 
shows locations of the relevant hydro meteorological stations outside Bangladesh.  FFWC is 
getting hydrological information by different mode like email , fax  etc. during the monsoon 
period. 
   Information technology has provided the access to the World Wide Web for extracting 
necessary information. The website (www.imd.gov.in) of Indian Meteorological Department 
provides rainfall information all over the India.  It also provides numerical weather products 
related to rainfall forecast and monsoon activity which very helpful for the flood forecasting 
purposes as Bangladesh shares common river basin with India. The Table 2 shows the list of 
major stations of GBM Basin in India, Nepal and China whose data FFWC is getting during 
monsoon period for flood forecasting purposes. 
Table 2 Data received from outside Bangladesh Catchment 
Basin River Station Data type 
Indian Catchment    
Ganges Farakka 3-Hourly data Ganges 
Ganges Sahibganj 3-Hourly data 
Teesta Domohoni Hourly 
Teesta Gajaldoba Hourly 
Brahmaputra Guwahati                 
( DC Court) 
3-Hourly data 
Brahmaputra Pandu 3-Hourly data 
Brahmaputra Goalpara 3-Hourly data 
Brahmaputra Dhubri 3-Hourly data 
Dudkumar Ghugumari Hourly 
 
Brahmaputra 
Darla Jaldhaka Hourly 
Barak Badarpur Hourly 
Barak A.P.Ghat (Silchar) 3-Hourly data 
Manu Kailashahar Hourly 
Meghna 
Gumti Amarpur Hourly 
China Catchment 
Brahmaputra Nugesha Daily data 
Brahmaputra Yangcun Daily data 
Brahmaputra 
Brahmaputra Nuxia Daily data 
Nepal Catchment 
Raptinadi Kusum Hourly 
Narayani Narayanhat Hourly 
SaptaKashi Chatara Hourly 
Ganges 
Kankai Mainachuli Hourly 
 
4.  Application of upstream data in Flood Forecasting Systems in Bangladesh 
 
Upstream hydro meteorological data plays important role in flood forecasting activities in 
Bangladesh as Bangladesh is located downstream of the GBM basin.FFWC uses a hydrodynamic 
model (MIKE11) which is developed by Danish Hydraulic Institute (DHI).It is a special version 
of MIKE11 Flood Forecasting (MIKE 11 FF)conceptual Hydrodynamic model which is used for 
forecast generation.The General Model (GM) developed under MIKE11 was adapted to real time 
945 
 
operation in which boundary extended near to the Indian border on all main rivers. The model 
covers about 82,000 km2 of entire northern areas of the country. The areas are sub-divided into 
107 sub-catchments. It includes 195 river branches, 207 link channels, 40 Broad Crested Weirs. 
The total river length modeled is about 7270 km. 
 
There are 17 boundarystations in FFWC‘s flood forecasting model which are located along the 
periphery of Bangladesh. Figure 3 shows the location of Boundary stations and river network of 
the model. The water level boundaries in the Brahmaputra and Ganges have the greatest influence 
on the flooding in Bangladesh (CSFFWS, 2005).For the operation of the model, 72 hours 
estimated water level has to give at the boundary stations. For the good quality of model results 
accuracy, boundary estimate should be very accurate. Accuracy of the estimation mostly depends 
on the upstream water level as well as personal skill of the modeler or forecaster. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3  Boundary and  river network of flood forecasting model 
At present availbale upstream data plays very important role in estimation of boundary water 
level. Based  on the available upstream hydrological and meterorological data forecaster in 
FFWC estimates boundary water level. Figure 4 Shows the two hydrograph of the Brahmaputra 
river at Noonkhawa and Dubri which shows  nearly the same trend . Similarly other data from 
other stations is helping in estimation of water level for the model operation.  
 
 
946 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4 Hydrographs at Noonkhawa and Dubri of Brahmaputra River 
 
5. Ganges, Brahmaputra and Meghna (GBM) Basin Model 
 
The GBM basin model was originally developed at FFWC, BWDB in 2005. After development, 
the model has been tested at IWM using several rainfall data sets. The model has also been used 
in several studies in the last several years. The model is developed based on MIKEBASIN, the 
GIS based water resource modelling interface developed by DHI Water & Environment, 
Denmark. At this stage, the model includes 133 sub-catchments out of which 79 in the Ganges 
basin, 47 in the Brahmaputra basin and the rest 7 in the Barak basin. Areas included in the 
Ganges, Brahmaputra and Barak basins are 979503 sq. km, 520663 sq. km. and 26567 sq. km, 
respectively. The model includes snow melt feature in the snow fed catchments of Hindukush 
Himalaya region. However, the complex glacier melt phenomenon is not defined in the model. 
Lumped features of the water retention and control structures (reservoirs and dams) within India 
are incorporated in the model based on information available in secondary sources. The diversion 
of water through Bhagirathi river towards Huglyriver in the Ganges basin is not included in the 
model. The model is calibrated at outlet stations: Hardinge Bridge and Bahadurabad inside 
Bangladesh. The performances of the model need to be tested with the outside data of 
Bangladesh. The model needs further refinement and validation with recent data and information. 
The extent, sub-catchments distribution and river system of GBM basin model is shown in Figure  
 
6. Regional Cooperation 
Regional cooperation among the South Asian countries can play an important role in improving 
flood forecasting activities.  Regional cooperation, policy and program like SAARC disaster 
management framework, Regional Flood Information System in the Hindu Kush Himalayan 
Region under ICMOD initiatives are examples of exchange of flood information. 
947 
 
 
Figure 5 River systems of GMB Basin Model 
6.1 SAARC Disaster Management Centre 
SAARC Disaster Management Centre (SDMC) was set up in October 2006 in New Delhi. The 
Centre has the mandate to serve eight Member Countries of South Asia Association of Regional 
Cooperation (SAARC) - Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan and 
Sri Lanka - by providing policy advice and facilitating capacity building services including 
strategic learning, research, training, system development and exchange of information for 
effective disaster risk reduction and management in South Asia. SAARC disaster management 
frame work provides the different aspects of cooperation among the South Asian Countries. 
 Establish and strengthen the regional disaster management system to reduce risks and to 
improve response and recovery management at all levels  
 Identify and elaborate country and regional priorities for action  
 Share best practices and lessons learnt from disaster risk reduction efforts at national 
levels  
948 
 
 Establish a regional system to develop and implement regional programmes and projects 
for early warning  
 Establish a regional system of exchanging information on prevention, preparedness and 
management of natural disasters  
 Create a regional response mechanism dedicated to disaster preparedness, emergency 
relief and rehabilitation to ensure immediate response  
6.2 International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development 
International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development (ICIMOD) is working to develop an 
economically and environmentally sound mountain ecosystem to improve the living standards of 
mountain populations and to sustain vital ecosystem services for the people of the Hindu Kush-
Himalayas region.  It is a regional knowledge development and learning centre serving the eight 
regional member countries of the Himalayan Region – Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, China, 
India, Myanmar, Nepal and Pakistan. ICMOD has taken an initiative to Establishment of a 
Regional Flood Information System in the Hindu Kush Himalayan Region (HKH-HYCOS). The 
Overall objective of the project is to minimise loss of lives and livelihoods by reducing flood 
vulnerability in the HKH region with specific reference to the Ganges-Brahmaputra-Meghna and 
Indus river basins.The Project purpose is timely exchange of flood data and information within 
and among participating countries through an established and agreed platform which is accessible 
and user friendly. 
The planned project Results from the HYCOS initiative are as follows:  
 Strengthened framework for cooperation on sharing regional flood data and information 
among participating member countries. 
 Establishment of a flood observation network in selected river basins in the participating 
countries. 
 Establishment of regional and national flood information systems to share real time data 
and information and increase lead time. 
 Enhanced technical capacity of partners on flood forecasting and communication to the 
end users. 
 Full-scale regional project planned and agreed among participating countries. 
The implementation is divided into five major components: a framework for cooperation; a 
regional flood observation network; a regional flood information system; enhanced capacity and 
communication; and planning of a scaled up fully integrated regional project. The project will 
cover Bangladesh, Bhutan, China, India, Nepal and Pakistan. 
7. Conclusion 
The paper focuses on some regional aspects of flood forecasting in Bangladesh. Flood forecasting 
plays an important role in Bangladesh to reduce losses and damages due to flood.  For flood 
forecasting purposes upstream hydrological data is helping for accurate estimation of model 
boundary. Regional cooperation is also very important for Bangladesh to provide longer lead-
949 
 
time in flood forecasting. Other cooperation like building common data base, joint research work 
and development GBM basin model can be taken for flood forecasting activities. 
References 
CSFFWS. (2005). Consolidation and Strengthening of Flood forecasting and Warning Services, 
FFWC, BWDB, Final Report, Vol.2. 
FFWC. (2007). Annual Flood Report, 2007, ffwc, BWDB. 
FFWC.(2011). Inception Report on Research and Prediction Modelling , FFWC, BWDB. 
www.jrcb.gov.bd 
www.icmode.org 
www.sdmc.org 
950 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
TRANSPORT MODE CHOICE MODEL FOR SCHOOL TRIP IN  
SYLHET CITY 
 
 
Md. Bashirul Haque1, Md. Mahmudul Huque Chayan2 and Md. Masud Rana3 
 
 
ABSTRACT: Choice of travel modes for school trip at Sylhel city are modeled in this paper 
using discrete choice analysis to identify the most influential factors that induces people to use 
school bus and reduce the dependency on small occupancy vehicles (auto, rickshaw, CNG etc.). 
A Multinomial Logit (MNL) mode choice model for school trip was developed in this regard 
using Stated Preference (SP) surveys conducted among guardians of students.  Model was 
generalized using two case studies; Blue Bird School & College and Scholarshome. Attributes 
and their levels for SP survey were established from preliminary survey conducted on the 
guardians. In the SP survey, respondents were presented with three hypothetical scenarios on 
school bus having distinct level of attributes along with current modes and they were asked to 
state their choice for school trip. From model output, it was found that guardians are more 
sensitive to travel cost as compared to travel time and also to supervising personnel as reason of 
security. They are also very inclined to separate bus services for each school. The results can help 
the related authority to formulate school bus related policies to reduce the number of vehicles in 
the roadway. The findings can also be useful for other cities of Bangladesh as well as for other 
developing countries, particularly those in Asia, which share similar socio-economic 
characteristics. 
 
 
1. Introduction 
  
Bangladesh, a densely populated developing country, is accommodating an incessantly booming 
population of more than 140 millions in an area of only 56,931square miles (BBS, 2011).  This 
situation is accute in major cities leading to the capital city, Dhaka. Sylhet is one the major cities 
of Bangladesh which is situated in the north east part of the country .The overall population of 
Sylhet city is   around 0.9 million with density of 32400 per square mile and population growth 
rate of the city is also high (2.1%) compared to other major cities (BBS, 2011). Transportation 
system is not improving to ensure the smooth travel of the large number of people which is 
introducing huge traffic congestion in the road network of the city. Moreover, a large number of 
school and colleges were established on the side of the road without any parking facilities.  
                                                        
1Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, SUST, Sylhet, Bangladesh.bashir_cee@yahoo.com 
2Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, SUST, Sylhet, Bangladesh. mchyn_88@yahoo.com 
3Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, SUST, Sylhet, Bangladesh.shaown06@yahoo.com 
951 
 
Significant amount of students commute using private vehicles or low occupancy vehicles which 
increase the number of vehicles on roadway and imposes huge congestion in the road network 
adjacent to schools due to loading and unloading of students during school starting and closing 
time. School buses have a high potential to significantly reduce congestion, time and cost. 
 
 
2. Literature review 
 
Transportation mode choice modeling is well established field of travel behavior research. Large 
numbers of researches were conducted in the context of developed and developing countries to 
identify the influential factors that control the travel behavior (Aljarad and Black, 1995; Ahmad, 
1995; Asensio, 2002).  Few of the researches were performed focusing school trips. Ewing, 
Schroeer and Greene (2004) analyzed the factors affecting school travel mode choice using 
revealed preference (RP) data from schools in Gainsville, Florida. They found factors such as 
school size, school enrollment and land use variables such as density and mix to be insignificant 
in mode choice. Rhoulac (2005) investigated the factors affecting mode choice by performing 
mode choice modeling on two modes - school bus and  cars, his findings indicated that factors 
such as total number of students in a household, student grades, household income, comfort level 
and perceptions of safety are significant in the decision making process. Vovsha and Petersen 
(2005) investigated how the decision to escort children to school by parents is affected by 
intrahousehold interactions. They considered children as active agents in the decision making 
process and developed a choice model for ride sharing. Factors such as the escort’s gender and 
the children’s age were found to contribute significantly in the decision to escort. Schlossberg et 
al. (2006) investigated the effects of urban form and distance on school travel mode choice for 
middle school children in Oregon and found that both factors play important roles in determining 
children’s travel mode. The effect of sex on mode selection was investigated by McMillan et al. 
(2006) who found that girls are 40% less likely to walk or bike to school compared to boys. A 
study conducted by Kerr et al. (2006) found that school travel mode choice is significantly 
affected by parental concerns and the neighborhoods environmental characteristics. A study by 
Cain (2006) focused on teenage riders’ perceptions on public transit. He concluded that due to 
financial, legal and parental constraints on the use of private cars, teenagers are more likely to use 
public transit than the general population. McDonald (2007) investigated the relationship 
between distance and school location and found that walking to school is very sensitive to travel 
time.  Yarlagadda and Srinivasan (2007) and McDonald (2008) published papers on how school 
travel mode choice is affected by socioeconomic factors and the interdependencies between the 
travel patterns of parents and children. They found factors such as child’s age, gender, ethnicity 
as well as parents’ employment and work flexibility to play important roles in mode choice. 
Campbell and Wang (2008) studied extensively the factors affecting mode choice of school 
children and found that convenience and ratings of modal safety play important roles. Modeling 
is the relatively new area of research in Bangladesh. In recent past few models (STP, 2005; 
Hasan, 2007; Haque, 2008; Enam, 2010; Haque, 2011) were established to analysis travel 
behavior under four step transportation demand modeling, most of the cases. A Multinomial 
Logit (MNL) mode choice model for school trip was developed by Choudhury et al. (2011) using 
Stated Preference (SP) survey conducted among parents of students from a premier school zone. 
Six attributes having multiple levels were chosen by focus group discussion for SP survey which 
952 
 
is travel time, travel cost, time to the bus stop, comfort, vehicle size and security. The results 
showed that for school buses, there are strong cost and time sensitivities as well as a significant 
preference for increased comfort levels.   Review of the previous literature reveals that mode 
choice modeling focusing school trip has strong methodology and importance. In spite of having 
few similarities, modes have area wise distinct features which strengthen the importance to 
develop a distinct model for the school trips in the every major cities of the country. These trips 
are different to other trips and have significant contribution to the total trips generated in major 
urban areas. Therefore, focus of this paper is to develop    a mode choice model for school trips in 
Sylhet city, an urban area of Bangladesh with special concentration on modeling preference of 
school bus services. 
 
 
3. Study area, motivation and Scope  
 
Large number of schools and colleges were established in Sylhet city attract large amount of trips 
per day. School bus system is not introduced in this city till now.  Most of them are commuting 
using private car, rickshaw or CNG which increase number of the trips on the road way and 
results in extra VMT.  It is established in literature that introducing school buses can go a long 
way in curbing school traffic related congestion (e.g. La Vigne 2007, Campbell and Wang 2008, 
etc.). These researches have provided us with the motivation for focusing our research on factors 
affecting school buses. So the main concentration of the study is to develop a framework of mode 
choice model for school trip to identify the people’s sensitivity to the school bus. For model 
development, Blue Bird School & College and Scholarshome were considered as study the area. 
Blue Bird School & College is situated in Subidbazar which is accommodating 1500 students and 
Scholarshome is situated is Pathantula which is accommodating 1026 students. 
   Though the estimated model has few limitations, it can provide useful insights on travel mode 
choice for school trips in Bangladesh and can help in policy formulation that can induce people to 
use the school bus with reduction of travel demand. Moreover, the proposed model framework 
can be applied in modeling similar choices, both for developed and developing countries. 
 
 
4. Survey design and development of the SP Survey 
 
4.1 Preliminary Survey 
  
Preliminary questionnaire survey was conducted with seventy two guardians of Blue Bird School 
& College and Scholarshome. Under preliminary questionnaire survey, random selections was 
made to get unbiased information regarding their existing travel mode, travel time, travel cost, 
alternative travel modes, socio-economic characteristics etc. The main objective of the survey 
was to identify the most influential attributes and their levels for final survey. 
   
4.2 Choosing attributes and their levels  
 
From the initial survey work, seven attributes were chosen and different level of each attributes 
was also established for SP survey. Choudhury et al. (2011) developed a SP based Multinomial 
953 
 
Logit (MNL) mode choice model for school trip. They have selected the attributes of school bus 
for SP surveys by focus group consultation.  . Explanations of each attributes and their levels are 
given in Table1 and Table 2 respectively. 
 
Table 1 Description of Attributes 
 
 
Table 2 Attributes with their levels 
 
Attributes Description 
Travel Cost The daily travel fare of school bus services (round trip per student) was 
considered in taka. Since people are very sensitive to travel costs and it 
depends on travel length and mode of transport, different levels of travel 
cost were considered.  
Travel time The approximate travel time was measured in min for a one-way trip (either 
going to or returning from school). . Different levels of travel time were 
considered. 
Bus stoppage It indicate the place where buses will stop to pick up or drop-off students. 
Door-to-door pickup may be feasible for microbuses, but for large buses it 
would take too much time. 
 
Vehicle size 
Vehicle size was categorized depending on the sitting capacity. Large buses 
may be safer in collisions and more efficient if they service students from 
multiple schools. Microbuses can probably travel at higher speeds and are 
more agile in traffic. 
Supervising 
person 
A teacher or assistant may be hired to supervise the bus. He/She will ensure 
the safe pick up and drop of the students in round trip (home to school and 
school to home). He will also handle the problems associate during travel. . 
School bus 
system 
A combined school bus system for a zone of city corporation or whole town 
may be introduced. Bus system may be individual.  Combined school bus 
service may be a effective tool to reduce traffic congestion.   
Attributes School bus Private 
Car/Rickshaw/CNG/Motorcycle 
Travel cost 400 Tk/  month 
600 Tk/month 
800 Tk /month 
1000 Tk/month 
1200 Tk/month 
Same as now 
Travel time 15 minutes more than now 
10 minutes more than now 
Same as now 
5 minutes less than now 
10 minutes less than now 
Same as now 
Bus stoppage In front of home 
From main road 
Same as now 
954 
 
 
Table 2 Attributes with their levels (continued) 
 
Attributes School bus Private 
Car/Rickshaw/CNG/Motorcycle 
Supervising 
person 
Teacher 
Assistant 
Same as now 
School bus 
system 
Individual 
Combine  
Same as now 
 
 
4.3 Generation of choice sets and scenarios 
 
Profiles of all alternatives for school bus were generated by statistical software SPSS (Statistical 
Program for Social Sciences) using partial factorial design. Full factorial design generated large 
numbers of profiles and it was very difficult to ensure even distribution in choice sets. Dominant 
profiles having the best option of all cases were discarded. Three SP scenarios on school bus 
were presented for each respondent and choice sets were generated randomly to ensure distinct 
profile in each scenario. Combinations of profiles among different alternatives were also done 
randomly. With these SP scenarios, the respondents were asked about their socio economic 
characteristics, existing travel mode and travel pattern. 
 
4.4 Main Survey 
 
The questionnaire was projected for the parents of the students because it is likely that parents 
decide which mode their children will use. But there is some limitations of this approach since 
children’s preferences may also affect mode choice to some extent (Campbell and Wang, 2008). 
However, in the strongly hierarchical decision prevalent in Bangladesh, the effects of children’s 
preference in not expected to be significant. 
   Data was collected by field survey on 60 respondents from Blue Bird School & College and 60 
respondents from Scholarshome with three SP scenarios from each. They were asked to state 
their choice for school trips. They were also asked about their socio-economic condition and 
current travel pattern which was analyzed using simple statistical tools and techniques.   
 
 
5. Data collection 
 
Socioeconomic characteristics of people very often influences the decisions regarding travel 
patterns and others factors.  Some important socio-economic characteristics of the respondents 
Comfort Air conditioned 
Non air conditioned 
Same as now 
Vehicle size 10-15 seats (micro bus) 
20-25 seats (mini bus) 
40-45 seats (large bus) 
Same as now 
955 
 
were analyzed first using simple statistical tools and techniques. Among all the respondents 
around 47% of the students were male. Half of the total students were accompanied by their 
mother because 82% of them were housewives and they have plenty of time to accompany their 
children. Main professions of father of 41% students were business followed by service (39%) 
and rest of them was immigrants. Around 21% of the respondents were private vehicle 
(motorcycle or car) owners. Income distribution of the respondents is given in Fig 1 which 
commend that most of the students come from middle income family.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1 Monthly income distribution 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
       Figure 2 Primary travel mode                                 Figure 3 Alternate travel mode  
 
956 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4 Travel mode share in SP scenarios 
 
Existing travel pattern of the respondents and their response to the new travel mode (school bus) 
were analyzed. 65% of the respondents said that they use rickshaws as primary travel mode for 
school trip due to its high accessibility from home to school and vice versa. It was also observed 
that more than half of the respondents used CNGs as an alternate travel mode if they miss 
primary travel mode. Primary and alternative choices of travel mode of the respondents are 
shown in Fig 2 and Fig 3 respectively. Respondents were asked about their mode choice in SP 
scenarios and half of them stated that the school bus to their primary choice. Travel mode share 
in SP scenarios is shown in Fig 4. 
 
6. Model Development 
 
Transportation mode choice model were developed for the students of Blue Bird School & 
College and Scholarshome for school trip using the software BIOGEME (Bierlaire Optimization 
toolbox for GEV Model Estimation). Attributes (travel time, travel cost etc.) were incorporated in 
the model as independent variables along with socioeconomic characteristics of the respondents 
as dummy variables. Five alternatives (CNG, motorcycle, private car, rickshaw and school bus) 
were considered and specification tests were done to get the best model. Model outputs were 
checked for the expected sign and magnitude of the coefficients. Results were also judged by 
statistical parameters (e.g. Final log likelihood, Adjusted R square, t-statistics, etc.). Hypothesis 
of the variables that may have significant impact on mode choice of school trips are illustrated in 
Table 3. 
Table 3 Hypothesis of mode choice variables 
 
Variables Hypothesis 
Travel time People sensitivity to travel time may vary in different modes. Increase 
in travel time may create disutility to particular mode like school bus, 
rickshaw etc. 
957 
 
Travel cost Travel fare sensitivity may vary depending on the mode characteristics. 
One unit increase in travel cost of any vehicle may impose disutility of 
that particular mode.  
Comfort  People are more likely to use travel mode with air condition facilities 
because of comfort. 
Supervising person Peoples may be inclined to use school bus  with a teacher as 
supervising person because they are more sensitive to the  security of 
the children and may rely on the teachers for better security . 
Bus stoppage Peoples may have strong affinity to use the school bus from in front of 
their homes. 
 
Table 3 Hypothesis of mode choice variables (continued) 
 
Variables Hypothesis 
School bus system People may be inclined to individual bus services because it may 
perform better due to unique control of school authority with higher 
responsibility. 
Bus size People may have strong affinity to use small (microbus) school buses.   
Monthly income  Both the husbands and wives of low to middle income families are 
very often employed and it becomes difficult to escort their children 
from home to school and vice versa timely. Therefore they may be 
more likely to use the school bus. 
Car ownership People who don’t have car may have strong affinity to the school bus. 
 
   At beginning, the model was estimated with generic travel time and travel cost and then other 
travel mode attributes (bus stoppage, school bus system, supervising person) were added as 
dummy variables. Socio-economic characteristics of the respondents were also added as dummy 
variables and remained or rejected from the model by specifications test. Explanations of dummy 
variables are given in Table 4.  
 
Table 4  Description of dummy variables used in mode choice model of school trip 
 
Dummy variable Description 
Comfort Dummy 1  Air conditioned 
2 Non air conditioned 
Supervising person dummy 1 Teacher 
2 Supervisor 
Bus stoppage 
Dummy 
1 From main road 
2 From in front of home 
School bus system 
Dummy 
1 Individual school bus system 
2 Combine school bus system 
Bus size 1 Small size (10-15 seats) 
958 
 
2 Medium size (20-25seats) 
3 Large size(40-45 seats) 
Monthly income 1 Low income ( less than 15000 Tk) 
2 Middle income (15000 Tk to30000 Tk) 
3 High income (more than 30000 Tk) 
Car ownership 1 People who own a car. 
2 People who have no car. 
 
   Five alternatives (CNG, motorcycle, private car, rickshaw and school bus) were considered in 
their choice set as stated above.  The utility functions of the mode choice alternatives for school 
trips  are presented below where ASCi indicates the alternate specific constant of the alternative i.    
 
 V rickshaw      =   ASC ric + βtt_cng_ric * rickshaw travel time + β tc_cng_ric * rickshaw travel cost 
 V CNG          =   ASC CNG + β tt_cng_ric * CNG travel time + βtc_cng_ric * CNG travel cost 
 V private car     =   ASC pc + βtt_pc_mcl * private car travel time+ βtc_pc_mcl * private car travel cost  
 V motorcycle   =   ASCmcl + βtt_pc_mcl* motorcycle travel time + βtc_pc_mcl * motorcycle travel cost 
 V school bus     =   ASC scb + βtt_scb * school bus travel time + βtc_scb * school bus travel cost + βsp                
                          * Supervising person dummy +β sbs * school bus system dummy + βco * car                                                         
                           ownership dummy + βmn_in *monthly income medium  dummy  
   The subscripts refer to either mode of travel or name of the variable. Here rickshaw , private car 
,motorcycle , school  bus , supervising person , school bus system ,  car ownership , monthly 
income  are  abbreviated as ric, pc, mcl, scb, sp, sbs, co, mn_in . The betas (β) refer to the 
sensitivity associated with each parameter. 
   Coefficients of the utility functions were estimated using maximum likelihood approach. Model 
outputs with sign, magnitude and t-test are presented in Table 5. 
 
Table 5 Mode choice model estimation results of school transport in Sylhet city 
 
Parameter Value Std. Error t-statistic 
ASCmcl -0.0740 0.521 -0.14 
ASCpc 0.415 0.543 0.77 
ASCric 2.48 0.297 8.34 
ASCscb 3.96 0.652 6.08 
βtc_cng_ric -0.0119 0.00930 -1.28 
β tc_pc_mcl -0.00771 0.00806 -0.96 
β tc_scb -0.0962 0.0119 -8.11 
β tt_cng_ric -0.0725 0.0250 -2.89 
β tt_pc_mcl -0.0336 0.0358 -0.94 
β tt_scb -0.0164 0.0126 -1.30 
β co 1.54 0.337 4.57 
β mn_in 0.428 0.248 1.72 
βsbs 0.372 0.255 1.46 
βsp 0.412 0.251 1.64 
 
959 
 
Multinomial legit model with 14 estimated parameters and 360 observations.  
Initial log-likelihood: -579.394, Final log-likelihood: -394.919 and Adjusted rho-square: 0.294 
   This model was gave high adjusted rho-square value meaning that the data fits better with this 
model. However, some coefficients have very low t-statistics but remain in the model for strong 
prior hypothesis. The signs of the coefficients are agreed with the priori hypothesis also. 
Alternate specific constant (ASC) of model alternatives (motorcycle, private car, rickshaw and 
school bus) were measured assuming CNG as base. From the model output, it was found that 
remaining all else being constant; school bus is more preferable mode of transport. Motorcycle 
has the most negative alternative-specific constant, implying that it is the least preferred. 
   People prefer lower costs and shorter travel times for any kind of transport mode. The signs of 
sensitivities associated with the parameters – travel time and travel cost gave negative as 
expected. People sensitivity to school bus travel time and travel cost is differ than other modes 
though they have common sensitivity to car-motorcycle and CNG-rickshaw. It also found that 
peoples are more sensitive to school bus travel cost than travel time while inverse situation is 
prevailed for other mode of transports. Coefficient of the dummy variables teacher as supervising 
person and individual school bus gave positive sign as expected and it give message that people 
will get higher utility from respective facilities of school bus. Comfort, bus stoppage and bus size 
were tested as an attributes of school bus but were found insignificant and gave illogical sign, 
Results indicates that peoples are indifferent to such facilities and these variables were discarded 
from final model. 
   Socio-economic characteristics have significant impacts on mode choice of the respondent as 
well. Positive sign in car ownership dummy means that peoples who have not car get more utility 
from school .It also found that middle income group get higher utility from school bus. 
 
 
7. Conclusion 
 
The findings of this research can be a effective tool for the respective authority to implement a 
school bus system to improve the traffic situation in Sylhet city. Though people prefer individual 
school bus system, they should be motivated for combined school bus system for Sylhet city. It 
will reduce total vehicle on roadway significantly during school starting and closing time as well 
as save time and money.It may be noted that the model framework can be also useful for other 
cities in Bangladesh as well as developing countries. This framework can be a guideline to 
develop model focusing other special issue like office trip.The study has several limitations 
though. For example, the data collection was difficult due to non co-operative attitude of the 
respondents and the response rate of the guardians was low. Besides the results of this research 
were based on a very small sample size (120) relative to the target population and model was 
developed considering two case studies only. The results can be improved by increasing the 
sample size and study area also. More modern techniques to attract respondents to the surveys 
can be explored in future research. Further, the model created in this project is based on the basic 
multinomial logit, and it can be improved by studying other kind of models such as mixed logit 
models which have more flexible error structures.   
 
 
 
960 
 
Acknowledgement 
 
The authors would like to thank the Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering of 
Shahjalal University of Science and Technology. The authors would also like to thank the 
students and their guardians of Blue Bird School & College and Scholarshome for their kind 
cooperation. 
 
References  
 
Ahmad, M. (1995). Choice of Mode for the Work Trip  in a Third World City: Karachi, The     
    Pakistan Development Review 34:2, pages 149-164.   
Aljarad, S. N. and Black, W. R.(1995). Modeling Saudi Arabia-Bahrain Corridor Mode Choice,   
    Journal of Transport Geography, Vol 3, No 4, pages 257-268.  
Asensio, J. (2002). Transport Mode Choice by Commuters to Barcelona’s CBD, Urban Studies,    
     Vol. 39, No. 10, pages 1881–1895, 
 BBS [2011], Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics, Ministry of Planning, Government of the People’s   
     Republic of Bangladesh. 
Campbell, E.K. and Wang, Q. (2009). Pupil Transportation: Factors Affecting Mode Choice and          
    the Amount of Parent-driven Trips to School. Presented at 88th Annual Meeting of the   
    Transportation Research Board, Washington, D.C. Urban Studies, Vol. 39, No. 10, pages   
    1881–1895, 
Choudhury, C. F., Khan, M. and Wang, J. (2011). Modeling Preference for School Bus Service in   
    Dhaka: An SP Based Approach, TRB 2011 Annual Meeting. 
Enam A. and Choudhury C. (2011), Methodological Issues in Developing Mode Choice Models  
    for Dhaka City, In TRB 2010 Annual Meeting CD-ROM.  
Ewing, R., Schroeer, M. and Greene, W. (2004). School Location and Student Travel: Analysis  
    of Factors Affecting Mode Choice. In Transportation Research Record: Journal of the  
    Transportation Research Board No. 1895, TRB, National Research Council, Washington,   
    D.C.,  pages 55–63.  
Hasan, S. (2007).Development of a Travel Demand Model for Dhaka City, M.Sc. Thesis,  
    Department of Civil Engineering, BUET, Dhaka. 
Haque, M. B. (2008). Development of an Urban Transport Model Using the Existing  
    Traffic Condition in Sylhet City. B.Sc. Thesis, Department of Civil and Environmental    
    Engineering, Shahjalal University of  Science and Technology, Sylhet. 
Haque M. B. (2011).Developing a Combined Residential Location and Transport Mode Choice:  
     Model Using RP and SP Data, M.Sc. Thesis, Department of Civil Engineering, Department of   
    Civil Engineering,  BUET, Dhaka. 
McDonald, N.C. (2007).Children’s Mode Choice for The School Trip: The Role of Distance and   
    School Location in Walking to School. In Transportation Vol. 35, No. 1, Springer Netherlands,   
    2008, pages 23 – 35.    
McDonald, N.C. (2008).Household Interactions and Children’s School Travel: The Effect of  
    Parental Work Patterns on Walking and Biking to School. In Journal of Transport Geography  
    Vol. 16, Elsevier, 2008, pages 324 – 331.   
Rhoulac, T.D. (2005). Bus or Car? The Classic Choice in School Transportation. In  
    Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board No. 1922,    
961 
 
    Transportation Research Board of the National Academies, Washington, D.C., pages 98–104.  
STP (2005), Strategic Transport Plan for Dhaka, Prepared by Louis Berger Group and  
    Bangladesh Consultant Ltd. 
Vovsha, P. and Petersen, E. (2005). Escorting Children to School: Statistical Analysis and  
    Applied Modeling Approach. In Transportation Research Record: Journal of the  
    Transportation Research Board No. 1921, Transportation Research Board of the National  
    Academies, Washington, D.C., pages 131–140.  
Yarlagadda, A.K. and Srinivasan, S. (2008). Modeling Children’s School Travel Mode and  
     Parental Escort Decisions. In Transportation Vol. 35, Springer Netherlands, pages 201 – 218. 
 
 
 
 
 
962 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
INDIGENOUS COPING PRACTICES TO REDUCE THE VULNERABILITY  
             OF   NATURAL DISASTER: A CASE STUDY ON FLOOD  
 
 
            Susmita Sharmin Munia1, Sauda Sultana2 and Saima Rahman3  
 
 
ABSTRACT: Bangladesh is most vulnerable to several natural disasters and every year natural 
calamities upset people's lives in some part of the country. The geographical setting of 
Bangladesh makes the country vulnerable to natural disasters. The mountains and hills bordering 
almost three-fourths of the country, along with the funnel shaped Bay of Bengal in the south, 
have made the country a meeting place of life-giving monsoon rains, but also make it subjected to 
the catastrophic ravages of natural disasters. The major disasters concerned here are the 
occurrences of flood, cyclone and storm surge, flash flood, drought, tornado, riverbank erosion, 
and landslide. Among these flood is the most common. Almost every year flood adversely affects 
the whole environment, including human beings, their shelters or the resources essential for their 
livelihoods. Bangladesh is characterized by flat terrain of alluvial soil, criss-crossed with an 
intricate system of over 230 rivers and rivulets. It is the largest delta of the three major river 
systems of the world The Ganges, The Bramahputras and the Meghna. 92.5% of the catchment 
areas of these river systems lie in the upstream, beyond the international boundary of Bangladesh. 
As such, the geographical location makes the country very prone to flood disasters.  Due to poor 
economic condition, the impacts of floods are high and heavy on the physical infrastructure and 
the life and livelihood of the people. Almost all the areas of Bangladesh are affected by rainfall 
induced monsoon flood, flash and coastal floods every year. Poor people compelled to live in 
flood prone areas for hundreds of years, practice indigenous knowledge for preparedness, coping 
and response in flood disasters. These practices reduce the vulnerability of people and structures 
by maximum utilization of our limited resources. This paper is intended to illustrate indigenous 
knowledge of coping flood practiced among the people of Charkoijuri village of Shajadpur in 
Sirajganj with a view to replicate these practices in other flood prone areas to manage flood 
effectively.  
  
Key word: Geography, Indigenous, Vulnerability, Coping, Practice, Utilization, Preparedness  
 
  
1Assistant Town Planner, Khulna Development Authority, Khulna, Bangladesh. munia87@gmail.com  
2Masters Student of Disaster Management, Center for Disaster Management and Vulnerability Study, 
University of Dhaka, Dhaka, Bangladesh. saudaenv@yahoo.com 
3Masters Student of Disaster Management, Center for Disaster Management and Vulnerability Study, 
University of Dhaka, Dhaka, Bangladesh. rahman.saima@yahoo.com 
963 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Since Bangladesh is a disaster prone country, it is subject to colossal damages to life and property 
almost every year. Most of the people in Bangladesh live in rural areas (73%). This scenario is 
more acute in rural areas and rural people are more vulnerable to natural disaster. Especially 
floods are common phenomena in Bangladesh and one of the main concerns of most rural 
households. People in rural areas have their own coping mechanism against disaster and they use 
their indigenous knowledge to reduce the effect of disaster. Chor koijuri village, Shahjadpur 
upazilla in Sirajganj district is selected as the study area. This is a cluster village developed by 
Manob Mukti Sonstha (MMS) assisted by Action Aid for the disaster affected ultra poor people. 
Most of the people living in this village are the victim of river erosion (Jamuna) and migrated 
from the nearest villages. But now people of this village are facing flood, drought, dense mist etc 
which hampers their livelihood pattern. Flood is most frequent in this area almost every year 
people are affected by flood which lasts at least 2-6 months. Background of the people lining in 
this village, their socio-economic condition, their sufferings, pattern of living, their own coping 
mechanisms against flood are  the concern of the study for identifying the overall scenario of 
facing realities of disaster in the study area. 
 
1.1.  Floods and its causes 
 
The origins of floods are diverse in Bangladesh. Floodwater may come from three main sources: 
the rivers, rainfall and the sea. These together or independently may generate more water than 
can be drained quickly from the land. However the specific causes of flood vary from region to 
region. Several explanations have been addressed: confluence of major rivers, high monsoon 
rainfall, rise of sea level, siltation of rivers, flood control measures, deforestation and others.  
 
 
2. Statement of the Problem 
 
Erosion of Jamuna river is one of the major disasters in the study area. Most of the landless poor 
people living in this village are the victim of river erosion which turned them landless. They 
compelled to migrate from their homestead. Before getting land and shelter in this cluster village 
most of them were living besides the highway and embankment in a dilapidated condition. 
Working as a day labor was the only means of income for them. People of the study area also 
face heavy flood every year which is making their economic condition and livelihood more 
vulnerable. Loom work, rearing poultry animal, growing vegetable, pesci-culture and working as 
a day labor are the main source of income in this village. Flood is most frequent in this area 
almost every year people are affected by flood which lasts at least 2-6 months. During this period 
all sources of income have become disrupted and the villagers lead very miserable life in absence 
of alternative income. They face hardship in every step of their normal livelihood. Children even 
can't continue their study as the only communication mean in this village is boat.  
3. Objectives of the Study 
- To determine the past and present condition of the people living the study area 
- To determine the impact of flood on the livelihood of the people 
- To find out the coping mechanisms practiced by the local people against flood3. Methods 
964 
 
3.1. Location of the study area 
 
Study area is Char Koijuri village, Koijuri union in Shahjadpur thana under Sirajganj district. 
Sirajganj district is in central Bangladesh, lying just west of the Brahmaputra River, borders on to 
the right bank of the Jamuna River and about 70 mi. (110 km) northwest of Dhaka. It is a district 
of Rajshahi division with an area of about 2497.92 km², is bounded by Bogra District on the 
north, Pabna district on the south, Tangail and Jamalpur districts on the east, Pabna, Natore and 
Bogra districts on the west. The main rivers are Jamuna, Baral, Ichamati, Karatoya and Phuljuri. 
About 10% area of the Chalan Beel is located in the Tarash upazila of this district. The 
population has been measured at 3215873. Males make up 51.14% of the population and females 
48.86%.The average literacy is 63%, or more specifically 73.4% for males, and 50.2% for 
females. Communication system of  Sirajganj consists of pucca 324 km, semi pucca 91 km and 
mud road 2393 km; 175 nautical miles of waterway; railway 41 km; 3 railway stations. The 
important Jamuna Bridge which replaces this ferry is nearby. It is sub-divided into nine 
Upazillas; four Upazillas - Kazipur, Sirajganj Sadar, Belkuchi and Shahjadpur border onto the 
Jamuna River. So the upazillas of Sirajganj are frequently affected by river erosion and flood.   
Selected study area is in Shahjadpur upazila. Shahjadpur thana was established in 1845 and was 
turned into an upazila in 1982. Shahjadpur Upazila has 16 Unions/Wards, 226 Mauzas/Mahallas, 
and 279 villages. As of the 1991 Bangladesh census, Shahjadpur has a population of 420452. It 
has 70998 households and a total area of 324.47 km². Males constitute are 52.05% of the 
population, and females 47.95%. Shahjadpur has an average literacy rate of 24.8% (7+ years), 
and the national average of 32.4% literate.  
   Char koijuri is one of the villages of Shahjadpur upazila. This village is only 1.5 km from the 
river jamuna. It is a cluster village developed by Manob Mukti Sonstha with the assistance of 
Action Aid. Total ten families are the inhabitants of this village. Most of them are the victim of 
disaster, landless, poor family. Major occupation of this village is loom weaving, day labor, 
livestock rearing and fish culture. The only means of communication to this village is boat.  
 
3.2. Methods used in the field  
 
This study is based on qualitative data. Data is collected from the people of the study area using 
Participatory Rural Appraisal. Tools used in this approach are focus group discussion (FGD), key 
informants interview (KII), Case study.  
 
 
 
 
 
965 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                 Fig: 1 Map of the study area 
966 
 
4. Findings & Analysis 
 
Common disasters faced by the people of this village are river erosion, flood, heavy rainfall, 
drought and dense mist. Among these the effect of flood is the worst as it stays 2-6 months and 
during this period people become more vulnerable as all the sources of their income are 
disrupted. During this period people survive using their saved money during the income season. 
People of this village face hardship in case of getting basic service facilities like education, health 
facilities. As the schools and health centre are far away from the village and the communication 
system is very poor. Government assistance for this village is not available. Lack of alternative 
income sources during disaster and electricity facility is increasing people’s suffering in this area.  
 
4.1. Focus group discussion 
 
Focus group discussion was conducted into two different group; male and female. As a 
participant of female focus group discussion findings from this discussion are discussed below- 
Char Koijuri is a cluster village developed by MMS as a local implementing organization assisted 
by Action Aid and DANIDA as a part of their project "Assistance to local communities on 
climate change adaptation and disaster risk reduction in BD".  
 
4.2. Coping practices adopted by local people during flood 
 
4.2.1. Raising the plinths of houses  
Houses of the cluster village are made concerning the issue of disaster. According to the 
villager’s house was made 20X12 fit and 11 fit high because of being safe from the flood level. 
Both men and women work together in this activity. They also raise their cattle shed, install toilet 
on raised ground to keep themselves safe from flood water.  
 
4.2.2. Alternative income sources & saving of money   
Most of the female members of the family works as a day labor and the male members operates 
hand loom. Poultry rearing, vegetable garden and fish culture are the additional source of income 
for the villagers. Average income of each family is 150 TK daily (50 Tk by female and 100 TK 
by male member) and they save average 1200 TK monthly for sustaining the hardship of flood. 
 
4.2.3. Storing necessary goods 
To cope with this situation besides money people also saves rice, chira, other grains and different 
necessary things. Women of this area save one handful of rice from their consumption every 
month to cope with distress during flood. People also store seeds.  
 
4.2.4. Purifying water 
Flood makes the sources of drinking water polluted and to cope with this situation inhabitant of 
this village use alum (fitkiri) to purify their drinking water.  
 
4.2.5. Practice of floating garden 
4.2.6. Use of portable oven  
Instead of using fixed oven in the court yard, women of this area use portable earthen cooking 
stove to cope with the situation of flood.  
 
967 
 
4.2.7. Storing cooking fuel & fodder 
People of the area are familiar with the visiting period of flood and to avoid the suffering in that 
period people store cooking fuel and fodder prior to flood.  
 
4.2.8. Raised bamboo or wooden platforms (matchan) 
People make raised bamboo or wooden platforms inside their rooms to keep their valuable things 
and utensils above the level of flood.  
 
4.2.9. Strengthening houses 
People repair and strengthen their houses by putting strong bamboo or other wooden pillars and 
make the thatched wall of the houses stronger. 
 
4.2.10. Adjusting food habit 
Generally people consume little during the period of flood otherwise women of most household 
gather edible and wild plants, arum leaves, kolmi shak, water lilies, they cook kalai dal, chhatu 
(flour normally made of barley or maize), kura (the red powdery coating of rice under the husk ) 
to cope with the food shortage during flood.  
 
4.2.11. Planting tree 
Inhabitants of this village plant trees around their houses to protect those from soil erosion. 
 
4.2.12. Raft of banana tree 
People make raft of banana tree for communication during flood.  
 
4.3. Case study  
 
Mosammad Shahida Khatun is a resident of Char Koijuri, Shahajadpur upazila of Sirajganj 
district. She is a 35 years old illiterate woman. Her family consist five members; two sons, one 
daughter and her husband. Two of her children go to the nearest primary school. Main income 
source of her family is her husband who is a loom weaver. He earns 500 TK (weekly). She also 
contributes in the family by working as a day labor. She earns 50 TK (daily), beside this she rears 
poultry species and grow vegetable for additional income. Almost every year she faces flood 
which disrupts her life and livelihood condition. To reduce the impact of disaster on her life she 
saves at least 500 TK per month during the income earning seasons. Mosammad Shahida Khatun 
was an inhabitant of the nearest village, lost her homestead and land due to the erosion of river 
Jamuna. Then she was compelled to take shelter on the road side embankment in a dilapidated 
condition. She and her husband used to work as day labor with minimal income and that work 
was not always available. They lived in that temporary shelter without major basic services and 
facilities in an unhealthy and miserable way with her three children. She said, "It was very 
common that we ate once in a day and the rest of the day we strived."     She stores vegetable 
seeds to cope with after flood, practice floating garden. Besides the occupation of day labor she 
also raises poultry species and fishes, makes kitchen garden, and prepares fertilizer for vegetable 
garden using household wastes for additional income to tackle the hardship during flood. These 
activities generate additional income to her family. These practices have upgraded her living 
condition but she faces hardship during the period of flood when all income sources of her 
disrupted. In case of flood which visit almost every year in June-July season for 2-6 months she 
have to maintain her family using the money she saved during the income season. To cope with 
968 
 
this situation besides money she also saves rice, other grains and different necessary things. 
Schooling of her children also hampered during the period of disaster as the only means of 
communication in this village is river. And only one boat is available for the whole community.  
  Unavailability of alternative source of income during the period of disaster is the major hardship 
for her. She also doesn't get any help from government in this matter. She thinks that better 
communication facility, electricity facility and alternative income source during disaster may 
reduce her sufferings in future.   
 
 
5. Conclusion 
 
As an inhabitant of flood prone area people of this locality have become successful in adapting 
themselves with the current situation through utilizing their minimum resources available and 
their adaptation capability is increasing in a significant way.  Through interpreting the overall 
scenario it can be said that If local people’s ideas are properly addressed and Government along 
with non government organizations provide necessary assistance then this indigenous technique 
of coping flood will become more successful and can also be replicated all over the country.  
 
 
References 
 
United Nations Environment Program (2001), Bangladesh: State of Environment 2001,      
Regional Resource centre for Asia and Pacific. 
Nasreen M. (2000), Coping Mechanisms of Rural Women in Bangladesh during Floods: A 
Gender Perspective, Disaster: Issues and Gender perspectives, University of Dhaka, Dhaka, 
Bangladesh. 
Oxfam-GB (2011), Management of Risk Environment, Women Leadership on Disaster 
Management, Bangladesh.  
 
 
969 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
CAPACITY NEED ASSESSMENT OF THE COASTAL COMMUNITIES OF 
BANGLADESH FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
 
Md. Ehsanul Hoque1 and Subrata Kumer Sarker1 
 
 
ABSTRACT: Bangladesh has already been declared as the most vulnerable country due to the 
climate induced risks.  Again the risks will not be felt equally by all the regions inside the 
country. Coastal zone is said to be the most vulnerable due to its low elevation, higher poverty 
rate, natural resource dependent livelihood etc. According to A1 story line (IPCC), if rapid 
growth occurs with higher population growth rate and consumerism, in 2030, monsoon 
temperature will increase 0.7 degree centigrade with an 11% increase of rainfall (in comparison 
to 1990). According to Nishat (2008), salinity in coastal belt will increase along with coastal 
plain inundation. He also concluded that, due to more frequent cyclone and storm surge and 
severe river erosion infrastructures and human settlement will be damaged.  In addition to 
different predictions by Climate change models there is observed sea level change in different 
point of the coast, as SMRC found a rising trend of 6.0 mm/year for char change point of Hatiya 
(SMRC, 2003).However, hence, very few studies were conducted to assess the capacity needs of 
the local people. This study has attempted to find the key sectors and points where intervention is 
needed.  For the said study, two coastal unions were identified from the most active portion of the 
coast i.e. The Meghna Estuary. PVCA and other PRA tools were practiced to have a better 
understanding about the risks of the livelihoods of community people, originated due to climate 
change. Secondary data related to socio-economic status of the area were collected from reports 
and compendium of Statistics, forest, agriculture, fisheries, land and livestock department. If 
researched properly, the findings could be used in designing climate change adaptation projects 
for the coastal zone of Bangladesh. Result can also be used as a reference for decision making for 
the best adaptation practice inside the country and around the world. 
 
1. Introduction 
 
 
Bangladesh has already been declared as the most vulnerable country due to the climate induced 
risks.  Again the risks will not be felt equally by all the regions inside the country. Coastal zone is 
said to be the most vulnerable due to its low elevation, higher poverty rate, natural resource 
dependent livelihood etc. Due to exposed location (Uddin and Iftekhar 2005) and remoteness, 
vulnerability of coastal zone has been amplified, as the historic damage data shows. According to 
A1 story line (IPCC), if rapid growth occurs with higher population growth rate and 
consumerism, in 2030, monsoon temperature will increase 0.7 degree centigrade with an 11% 
                                                        
1 Community Development Associate, UNDP Bangladesh. Contacts: ehsandev@gmail.com 
970 
 
increase of rainfall (in comparison to 1990). Again if same trend continue, in 2050 monsoon 
temperature will increase 1.8 degree centigrade with a 28% increase in rainfall (compared to 
1990). Dry season temperature will also increase 1.3 degree centigrade and 1.8 degree centigrade 
following a decrease in rainfall of 3% and 37% for the year 2030 and 2050 respectively. 
According to Nishat (2008), salinity in coastal belt will increase along with coastal plain 
inundation. He also concluded that, due to more frequent cyclone and storm surge and severe 
river erosion infrastructures and human settlement will be damaged.  In addition to different 
predictions by Climate change models; there is observed sea level change in different point of the 
coast, as SMRC found a rising trend of 6.0 mm/year for char change point of Hatiya (SMRC, 
2003). Again, based on IPCC reports and available studies, National Adaptation Plan of Action 
(NAPA) for Bangladesh has recommended 14, 32 and 88 cm of Sea Level Rise for the years 
2030, 2050 and 2100 respectively (MOEF, 2005).Climate change has increased unprecedented 
threats to life and livelihoods of people living in coastal areas of Bangladesh. Over the time, 
coastal population has confronted a number of tropical cyclones and storm surges, and 
voluminous salinity ingress. The geographical location of coastal areas along the Bay of Bengal 
has itself been manifested with such firsthand vulnerability of people to natural disasters followed 
by negative impacts on their life. Following any disaster, people always remain less able to cope 
and continue their regular life supporting livelihood function due to few alternative resource 
endowments in coastal area. Disproportionate resource distribution and access to natural 
resources and institutional services, particularly landless poor and marginal farmers face 
extremely vulnerability to disaster shocks.  With climate changes and of its increasing degree of 
impacts, the vulnerability of coastal people goes beyond any of their least coping capacities and 
remains far off long-term adaptation.  
 
1.1 Justification of the study 
 
Inhabitation history of coastal zone is to some extent the history of coastal process i.e. the process 
of accreditation and erosion. In addition, degree of coastalness has also been shaping the lives 
and livelihoods of the dwellers. People have inherited the knowledge and skills from their 
ancestors throughout the history and coped accordingly. But, as mentioned that there is a 
significant change in climate that is already observed and is happening has made the coping 
ability vulnerable. Few studies has been found that accommodated people’s opinion and 
perception regarding climate change  
 
1.2 Objectives 
 
To improve the understanding of capacity needs on longer term climate change. 
To identify the possible intervention options for future adaptation attempts. 
 
 
2. Methodology 
 
Both primary and secondary data were collected. Secondary data related to socio-economic status 
of the area were collected from reports and compendium of Statistics, forest, agriculture, 
fisheries, land and livestock department. Primary data were collected directly from, Community 
971 
 
people. Here it should be mentioned that, the whole process was gender sensitive and different 
age group and occupational group were included.  For ensuring, non-bias, randomness and 
representation, participants were selected based on the following criteria- 
 
 
 Gender: One third of the participants were female 
 Livelihoods: Participants were selected from three distinct groups (Agriculture, 
Fisher/forest user, Women) 
 Inhabitant for long time 
 Awareness level: Well aware about the area 
Prior to the PVCA process total population were divided into three groups- 
 Women 
 Farmer 
 Fisher/ Forest users 
In conducting the PVCA exercise, following tools were used- 
 Climate risk maps  
 Community history (time line)  
 Focus group meetings  
 Hazard Venn diagram  
 Historical transect  
 Household composition  
 Vulnerability context  
 Ranking  
 Seasonal activity calendar 
 Local resource map  
 
2.2 Description of the site 
 
The study has been conducted at Sukhchar union of Hatiya upazilla in Noakhali and at Char 
kukriukri union of Charfession upazilla in Bhola district respectively. Hatiya is an Upazilla under 
Noakhali district with total area of 1508.23 sq km and is surrounded by Noakhali Sadar and 
Ramgati upazilas on the north, Bay of Bengal, on the south and the east, Manpura upazila on the 
west  (Fig:1)(Banglapedia, 2006). It is 26 km away from the main land and is separated by the 
Hatiya Channel and Char kukrimukri is an isolated island detached by The Meghna River from 
the Charfesson Upazila. This upazilla has an area of 1106.3 sq km (Banglapedia 2006), and is 
surrounded by Lalmohan upazila on the north, Monpura upazila, lower meghna and Shahbazpur 
channel on the east, Bay of Bengal on the south and Dashmina and Galachipa upazilas on the 
west. For more than 100 char lands in Char Fasson Upazila, river network defines the mode of 
transportation (Banglapedia 2006) (Figure 2). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
972 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig 1: Physiographic sketch of Hatiya upazilla Fig 2: Physiographic sketch of Charfesson upazilla 
 
3. Results and Data analysis 
 
3.1 Overall Climate Vulnerability of the country 
 
So far different studies have been done to identify and assess the impact of climate change on 
different sectors and on different regions of the country. It has become so tough to consult and 
compile all under a single heading. However, following table is an organized and causal 
summary that can be sparsely looking at for a general understanding (Table1). 
 
973 
 
Drivers Effect Examples Reference Sector(s) affected 
Net erosion increased in Northern and western part of 
Hatiya 
Eastern coast of Bangladesh is highly susceptible to 
coastal erosion 
Ali, A., 1999. ; UNDP, 2011. Agriculture and Settlements Increased 
coastal 
erosion 
0.1 million people have become homeless due to 
river bank erosion 
Akter, T., 2009. Settlement and migration 
Saline water 
intrusion 
Due to sea level rise, saline water may overtop the 
coastal embankments 
Ahmed, A. U., 2006.; UNDP, 
2011 
Agriculture and fishery 
Sea level rise 
Low land 
inundation 
Nijhum Dweep, a national park will be affected Hussain, M.G. & Hoq, M.E. 
eds., 2010. 
Biodiversity 
Shortage of 
irrigation 
from 
groundwater 
Most of the suction mode tube wells will go dry at 
dry season 
Rashid, M. H. & Islam, M. H., 
2007. 
Agriculture Decreasing 
trend in 
rainfall in dry 
season and 
low flow Shortage of 
surface water 
during dry 
season 
Animals use to have least access to freshwater 
sources during the dry season. Due to drinking of 
poor quality water these animals fell victim to 
diseases, which reduce their economic efficiency 
(draught power, milk production etc) 
RVCC, 2003 Livestock 
Water 
logging 
Due to intense precipitation water logging has 
increased inside south polder of Hatiya 
UNDP, 2011 Agriculture 
Flooding  Based on increased flooding proportion of highland 
will decrease 
Ahmed, A. U., 2006 Agriculture and Settlement 
Increase in 
rainfall during 
wet season 
Increased 
sedimentation 
Increased sedimentation may alter the bottom 
condition of habitat and ecosystem of fish 
Hussain, M.G. & Hoq, M.E. 
eds., 2010. 
Capture Fishery 
974 
 
Mortality rate 
of Shrimp 
fries 
Studies have shown that if temperature crosses a 
threshold of 320c mortality rate of shrimp fries 
increase. Thus will decrease production 
Ahmed, A. U., 2006 Aquaculture Temperature 
 
 
Frequency of 
cyclone and 
storm surge 
has increased 
Karim (2010) consulted with community people; they 
have ranked cyclone and storm surge as the second 
important problem  
Karim, R., 2010 Human life, Agriculture, 
infrastructure 
Warmer and 
more humid 
weather 
Incidence of 
paste in crops 
has increased 
Community people of Hatiya reported that incidence 
of paste and disease in crops has increased then  10 
years ago 
UNDP, 2011 Agriculture 
975 
 
3.2 Demography and Socio-Economic status 
 
Sukhchar union is the most vulnerable union of Hatiya upazila, one fifth of total union was existed 
now, also in decline trend. Due to river bank erosion over a period of thirty years rest union will be 
goes to river as per community perception.  Thirty years back Sukhchar union had been three mouzas 
namely Char Varot, Sukhchar and Char amanullah. Sukhchar and char varot mouza before now 
enclosed by river totally and char amanullah partially. Char KukriMukri Union has a total population 
of about 23000 of which male and female ratio is 49% and 51% respectively. The average literacy 
rate of Char Fesson upazila is 25.4% of which male 30% and female 20.8%. This is however lower in 
Char KukriMukri Union (table 2).  
 
Table 2: Demographic and socio-economic status of SukhChar and Char KukriMukri Union 
 
Important Resource Shukchar Char Kukrimukri 
Area 4.45 km2 36.75 km2 
No. of people 4100 23000 
Union parisad 01 01 
Primary School 01 01 
Registered Primary School 03 04 
Madrasha (dakhil) 01 01 
Cyclone centre 09 10  
Madrasha (koumi) 01 03 
Mosque 05 35 
Mondir 03 02 
Graveyard 01 03 
Union family planning centre 01 01 
Community clinic 01 01 
Bridge 01 08 
Culvert 06 14 
Hat Bazar 02 04 
  
Most of the people of Sukhchar and Char Kukri Mukri are engaged in farm based activities (around 
60% for Sukhchar, around 40% for Char Kukri Mukri). The second largest livelihood group for the 
both unions is fishing (Figure 3). Fishing is an important and easily accessed type of livelihood and 
source of subsistence and household protein food in the area. Approximately 30 percent people are 
directly involved with fish catch in adjacent river and nearest distance of the sea, as well as shrimp 
fry collection for significant months of a year; In case of Hatiya, we have found, around 15% people 
who are engaged in fishing. 
 
 
 
976 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                           
Figure 3: Livelihood pattern of Sukchar & Charkukrimukri 
 
 
 
Figure 4: Category of farmers based on possession of agricultural land type at Sukhchar & Char 
KukriMukri 
 
Land possession structure in Char KukriMukri is more homogenous then SukhChar. As already 
mentioned that, most of the SukhChar has eroded, people have become landless (52.13%). On the 
other hand, all rich farmers of Char KukriMukri are mostly absentee landlord. They usually reside in  
977 
 
CharFassion or in Bhola town and lend land to other poor farmers. Based on their response about 
average monthly engagement with different livelihoods, we have found Falgun, Chaitra and 
Boishakha as the leanest period when, they usually fail to engage themselves in any on-farm or off-
farm activities (Figure 4).  
 
 
3.3 Hazard Dynamics 
 
After rigorous discussion among them, participants of PVCA have identified different hazards and 
ranked them accordingly. They also have identified the areas that are most vulnerable based on their 
response, it can be concluded that, north-east and north-west corner of Sukhchar union is highly 
vulnerable due to river erosion, tidal surge and cyclone. Major natural disaster occur in the  last 40 
years were cyclone and tidal surge in 1970, cyclone in 1991, high tide and saline water intrusion in 
1997, cyclone in 2007, cyclone in 2009 and high tide and saline water intrusion in 2010. Again, most 
of the areas of Char Kukri-Mukri are highly vulnerable due to tidal surge and river erosion. On the 
other hand, ward no 2, 3 and 9 is vulnerable due to water logging (Figure 5). Participants of Sukhchar 
have ranked river erosion as the most damaging based on magnitude and frequency. In case of Kukri 
Mukri, the most damaging hazard is cyclone, for both cases, tidal surge is the  
 
     
                                       Figure 5: Hazard map of Sukchar   and Kukrimukri 
 
Between 1991 and 1995, tropical cyclone hit the area three times which caused loss of people’s life, 
natural resources of agriculture, fisheries and livestock. Participants recognized the cyclone of 1991 
978 
 
to be severe for those people who were living outside the embankment and exposed to first hit. The 
number of cyclone event increased between 1996 and 2000 and was observed for four times (table 3). 
 
Table 3: Hazard ranking by the participants of Sukhchar and Char Kukri Mukri 
 
Sl No Ranking for 
sukchar 
Hazard  Ranking for Charkukrimukri 
01 1 River bank erosion 4 
02 2 Tidal surge 2 
03 3 Cyclone 1 
04 4 Salinity intrusion 6 
05 5 Water logging 7 
06 6 Drought 5 
07 - High tide 3 
 
 
3.4 Climate resilient livelihood options 
 
Participants have scored the livelihood options (identified prior by themselves) in a scale of 1-5 
based on the parameters- ‘input availability’, ‘value chain’, ‘service providers’, ‘skills’, 
‘vulnerability’. We have calculated the scores and found ‘small cottage industry’ as the most 
preferred climate resilient activity. They have also preferred ‘fishing net preparation’ and ‘duck 
rearing’ than other options (Table 4) 
 
Table 4: Suitability of Climate Resilient Livelihood Options 
 
Climate 
resilient 
Livelihood 
Options 
Input 
availabili
ty 
Value 
chain/marke
ting 
Presence 
of 
Service 
Providers 
Skill 
(training, 
knowledge) 
Vulnerab
ility 
Willingne
ss to 
contribut
e 
Averag
e Score 
Ran
k  
Fishing net 
preparation 
 
3 5 0 4 4 4 3.33 2 
Small cottage 
industry(using 
hogla and 
others plant 
materials) 
5 4 0 4 3 5 3.5 1 
Duck Rearing 5 5 1 3 3 3 3.33 2 
Carb fattening 
 
5 4 0 3 1 2 2.5 5 
979 
 
Climate 
resilient 
Livelihood 
Options 
Input 
availabili
ty 
Value 
chain/marke
ting 
Presence 
of 
Service 
Providers 
Skill 
(training, 
knowledge) 
Vulnerab
ility 
Willingne
ss to 
contribut
e 
Averag
e Score 
Ran
k  
Fish drying 
and 
manufacture 
5 5 0 4 2 3 3.16 3 
Cultivation of 
saline tolerant 
vegetable 
crops  
2 5 2 2 2 5 3.0 4 
 
The collected data were analyzed under specific tool and for identified category using MS Excel and 
MS Word programme, was calculated and presented in narrative text as well as graph and table.  
 
4. Major Findings and Conclusion 
 
For agriculture sector, Poush Magh and falgun can be termed as lean period in sukchar. In relation to 
this respondents have figured out that from the month of poush labors migrate from the area for 
searching of new scope to mainly, Chittagong, Comilla and Noakhali (main land).The struggling 
months appears twice a year in char kukrimukri– first lean period is short and in the Bangla month of 
Chaitra (March - April). The second lean period is long spread over Bangla months of Vadra (August 
- September), Ashwin (September - October) and Kartik (October - November).As agriculture is the 
main profession both in Sukchar and Char kukrimukri the existing cropping pattern need to be 
changed for the welfare of the community people. Improved cropping pattern and saline tolerate 
varieties should be introduced (Table 5 and 6). 
 
Table 5: Proposed improved Cropping Pattern (Fallow -T.Aman (HYV) – Boro (HYV) 
 
Cropping pattern Fallow T. Amon Boro (HYV) 
Yield (ton/hec) - 4.5 (HYV)  6.4 
Total  10.9 
Gross return (tk.) 109,000 
 
Table 6: Proposed improved Cropping Pattern (Fallow -T.Aman (HYV) – Boro (HYV) 
 
Cropping pattern Okra (BARI dharosh-
1) 
T. Amon (HYV) Boro (HYV) 
Yield (ton/hec) 8.18 4.5  6.4 
Total  14.9 
Gross return (tk.) 149,000 
980 
 
Bangladesh Rice Research Institute (BRRI), Bangladesh Agricultural Research Institute (BARI) and 
Bangladesh Institute of Nuclear Agriculture (BINA) developed some saline tolerant varieties (Table 
7) suitable coastal areas which can tolerate to a certain level of salinity. 
 
Table 7: Some Saline tolerant species 
 
S.L 
No 
Crops 
Name 
Variety Season Yield 
(t/ha) 
Remarks 
01 Rice BRRI dhan 40 T. Aman 4.5 Tolerate salinity 8 (in dS m-1) at 
seedling &  maturity stage 
02 Rice BRRI dhan 41 T. Aman 4.5 Tolerate salinity 8 (in dS m-1) at 
seedling & 8 at maturity stage 
03 Rice BRRI dhan 47 Boro 6.4 Tolerate salinity 12-14 (in dS m-1) at 
seedling & 8 at maturity stage. 
04 Rice BINA dhan 8 Boro 6.5 Tolerate salinity 12-14 (in dS m-1) at 
seedling & 8 at maturity stage. 
05 Maize BARI hybrid bhutta-
04 
Rabi 7.6 - 
10.73 
Also used as fodder 
06 Maize BARI Khoibhutta Rabi 8.58 - 
11.50 
 
- 
07 Maize BARI hybrid bhutta-3 Rabi 9.08 - 
08 Mustard BARI sharisa- 11 Rabi 1.57 
 
- 
09 Cowpea BARI Cowpea Rabi 1.177 Sowing date 15January provide 
highest return 
10 Tomato BARI Tomato-03 Rabi 37.86 Have to cultivate in raised bed with 
mulching 
 
For future adaptation attempts Cattle Fattening, Pigeon Rearing, improved aquaculture and some 
Climate Resilient Approaches such as Rice-fish Integrated Farming, Silvo-Fishery, Apiculture, 
Golpata management can be introduced in the coastal regions of Bangladesh. The existing 
institutional capacity of either govt. or NGO needs to be expanded in the union. The respective 
department has ample opportunities to provide climatic risk information to livelihood specific 
groups, irrigation facilities for Boro cultivation, improved rice and vegetable varieties, financial 
access of marginal farmers and landless people and establishing educational institutes. 
 
References 
 
Ahmed, A. U., (2006). Bangladesh Climate Change Impacts and Vulnerability: A Synthesis. Climate 
Change Cell, Department of Environment: Bangladesh  
981 
 
Ahmed, A. U. & Neelormi, S. (2009). Livelihoods of Coastal Fishermen in Peril: In search of Early 
Evidence of Climate Change Induced adverse Effects in Bangladesh. Dhaka: Campaign for 
Sustainable Rural Livelihoods (CSRL). 
Akter, T., (2009). Climate Change and Flow of Environmental Displacement in Bangladesh. Dhaka: 
Unnayan Onneshan-The Innovators.  
Ali, A., (1999). Climate change impacts and adaptation assessment in Bangladesh. Climate Research, 
Volume12, pp. 109–116. 
Hussain, M.G. & Hoq, M.E. eds., (2010). Sustainable Management of Fisheries Resources of the Bay 
of Bengal- Compilation of national and regional workshop reports. Support to Sustainable 
Management of the BOBLME Project, Bangladesh Fisheries Research Institute. SBOBLMEP Pub. 
/Rep. 2. 122 p.  
Karim, R., (2010). Sustainability views of Adaptation measures to the potential impacts due to 
climate change in the Coastal zone of Bangladesh. M. Sc. Stockholm: Royal Institute of Technology. 
MOEF, (2005). National adaptation program of action. Final Report, Ministry of Environment and 
Forest, Government of Bangladesh. 
MoEF, (2011). Adaptation Management Plan for Hatiya Upazilla.Dhaka, Bangladesh 
MoEF, (2011). Adaptation Management Plan for Char Fassion Upazilla.Dhaka, Bangladesh 
Nishat, A., (2008). Climate Change and Water Management in Bangladesh. In: International 
Conference of Global Climate Change and its Effects. Dhaka, August 25, 2008. 
RVCC, (2003). Report of a Community Level Vulnerability Assessment Conducted in Southwest 
Bangladesh. A report prepared by the Reducing Vulnerability to Climate Change (RVCC) Project, 
CARE Bangladesh, Dhaka. 
Sarwar, M. G. H., (2005). Impacts of Climate Change on Coastal Zone of Bangladesh. Masters. 
Sweden: Lund University’. 
SMRC, (2003). The Vulnerability Assessment of the SAARC Coastal Region due to Sea Level Rise: 
Bangladesh Case. SAARC Meteorological Research Center, Dhaka SMRC-No. 3. 
 982 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
  
SOLAR DESALINATION USING LOW COST TUBULAR SOLAR STILL (TSS) 
 
 
Md. Abdur Rab1, Dr. Kh. Md. Shafiul Islam2, A. K. M. Mominul Islam3, Md. Monjur-A-Elahi4  
 
 
ABSTRACT: In the world, demand of portable fresh water is increasing day by day because of 
population explosion all over the world, greater industrial development, expansion of agricultural 
activities and climate change. The available underground and surface water sources are being 
affected by salinity, industrial and agricultural wastes, limit the suitability of many fresh water 
availability resources. Now it is recognized that freshwater is a scare resources and more country 
is converted into water-stressed country due to the scarcity of freshwater resources. Therefore, 
this project was undertaken to study the performance of tubular solar still for desalination 
purpose. At first, a low cost tubular solar still was designed and constructed using locally 
available materials. Field experiment was carried out on constructed unit located on the roof top 
of the Civil Engineering Department, KUET, Khulna, Bangladesh from January 01 to April 30, 
2011. The hourly output and ambient air temperature data was also collected in some typical days 
(2, 3 and 10 May, 2011) to show the effect of air temperature on productivity of tubular solar still. 
The analysis shows that the production rate of a tubular solar still is mainly depend on the 
intensity of solar radiation and the production rate will be higher in the summer season. It was 
observed that average daily distilled output of Tubular solar still increases for the months January 
to March except for the month April. It is founded that the average daily production rate of 
tubular solar still was 0.302lit/day (1.885lit/m2-day) and the production cost of distilled water 
was Tk.0.453/lit. The construction, operation and maintenance of tubular solar still are easier. So, 
one can easily construct a tubular solar still using locally available material to produce fresh 
water from saline water in the remote, coastal and arid areas to meet small scale fresh water 
demand. 
  
 
1. Introduction 
 
Water is one of the most abundant resources on earth, covering three-fourths of the planet’s 
surface. There is an almost unfathomable amount of water on earth: about 1.4 billion km3
 
(330 
million cubic miles) (Barlow and Clark, 2002). About 97% of the earth’s water is salt water in the 
oceans and a tiny 3% (about 36 million km3) is fresh water contained in the poles in the form of 
ice, ground water, lakes and rivers, which supply most of human and animal needs (Ahmed and 
                                                        
1 Under Graduate student, Civil Engineering Department, KUET, Khulna, Bangladesh. abdur.rab06kuet@
gmail.com 
2 Professor, Civil Engineering Department, KUET, Khulna, Bangladesh. khmsislam@yahoo.com 
3 Under Graduate student, Civil Engineering Department, KUET, Khulna, Bangladesh. shaikat.engr.ce@g
mail.com  
4 Deputy Project Engineer, DOM-INNO Developers Limited, Dhaka, Bangladesh. manjurkuet@gmail.com 
 983 
Rahman, 2002). Nearly, 70% from this tiny 3% of the world’s fresh water is frozen in glaciers, 
permanent snow cover, ice and permafrost. Thirty percent of all fresh water is in underground, 
most of it is in deep, hard-to-reach aquifers. Lakes and rivers together contain just a little more 
than 0.25% of all fresh water; lakes contain most of it (Kalogirou, 2005). The data relevant to 
water requirements shows that around 25% of the total world populations do not have an 
adequate fresh water supply, both for quality and quantity (Agha et al., 2005). Water shortages 
affect 88 developing countries that are home to half of the world’s population. In these places, 
80-90% of all diseases and 30% of all deaths result from poor water quality (Leitner, 1998). 
Furthermore, over the next 25 years, the number of people affected by severe water shortages is 
expected to increase fourfold (Engelman et al., 2000). Some of this increase is related to 
population growth, some is related to the demands of industrialization. Currently, water 
consumption doubles every 20 years, about twice the rate of population growth (Barlow and 
Clark, 2002). The ground water source is being polluted by organisms, organic and inorganic 
compounds due to the ultimate disposal of man-made harmful pollutant into the underground 
reservoir (Malik et.al., 1982). It is estimated that approximately one-third of the world’s 
population use groundwater for drinking (Nickson et al., 2005). However, in the coastal regions 
in any country, groundwater quality patterns are complex because of the input from many 
different water sources. These include precipitation, seawater, ascending deep groundwater, and 
anthropogenic sources such as wastewater or irrigation return flow (Ramkumar et al., 2010). The 
main sources of water in Bangladesh are surface waters in rivers, reservoirs, lakes, canals and 
ponds, and ground water in deep and shallow aquifers. In the coastal areas of Bangladesh water 
supply is facing great challenges in meeting the rising freshwater demand due to limited water 
supply from the available underground and surface water sources, which are affected by salinity. 
The increase in salinity in Khulna started after the commencement in 1975 of the Farrakka 
Barrage operation in India, which significantly reduced the flow in the Ganges, located at 
upstream of the Gorai River, a major source of freshwater to the rivers surrounding Khulna. At 
present, the principle cause of salinity intrusion in Khulna region is the drop of hydraulic head 
during the dry period (November to May) into both surface and groundwater of the area (Hassan 
et al., 1998). The major difficulty in developing the appropriate water supply system for the 
communities is that the aquifers containing fresh water are not always found at convenient 
locations. So, it would be feasible to address the water shortage problem with seawater 
desalination. Most of the modern interest in desalination is focused on developing cost-effective 
ways of providing fresh water for human use which typically needs extremely huge amount of 
energy as well as specialized expensive infrastructure. But small scale and renewable energy 
powered desalination plants are also being taken interest as a particular option where solar power 
is rich. Solar desalination is the simplest desalination technique and environmentally friendly 
compared other methods such as reverse-osmosis, electro-dialysis and biological treatment. 
 
 
2. Design, Construction and field experiment of tubular solar still  
 
Tubular solar still consisted of tubular frame covered with a transparent normal polythene paper 
and a black rectangular trough for storing saline water. The tubular frame is 1.00 m long, 20 cm 
in diameter and is comprised of 2.75 mm thick helical G.I wire. The pitch of the spiral ring is 
about 5 cm. The trough of 1.0 m long, 16 cm width and 5 cm depth is made of carton paper 
(painted black inside). The schematic diagram of tubular solar still is shown in Figure 1. 
 
 984 
    
 
 
 
 Figure 1 Schematic diagram of tubular solar still                    cross section at A-A 
 
2.1. Production principle of tubular solar still 
 
The solar radiation, after transmission through a tubular cover, is mainly absorbed by saline water 
in the trough. The tubular cover and trough absorb the remaining small amount of the solar 
energy. Thus, the water in the trough is heated and then begins to evaporate. Many types of heat 
transfer occur inside the tubular cover and outside, e.g., evaporative heat transfer from the saline 
water to the tubular cover, condensate heat transfer between the saline water and tubular cover, 
convective heat transfer between the saline water and the tubular cover, the trough and the water, 
the trough and the tubular cover and the cover and the atmosphere, radioactive heat transfer 
between the water surface and the tubular cover and the tubular cover and the atmosphere. The 
evaporative water vapor is transferred to the tubular cover and then finally condensed on the 
tubular cover inner surface, releasing its latent heat of vaporization. The condensed water trickles 
down at the bottom of the tubular cover due to gravity and is stored in a collection bottle through 
a pipe (12 mm diameter) provided at the bottom point of trough. Production principle of a tubular 
solar still is illustrated in Figure 1. 
 
2.2. Mass balance and energy balance equations 
 
Figure 2 shows, the mass and energy transfer within and outside of a tubular solar still. The key 
point of modeling is the accuracy of the evaporation from the saline water surface and the 
condensation on the tubular cover. 
 985 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2 Mass and energy transfer of a tubular solar still 
 
2.2.1. Assumptions 
The mass and energy balance equations are made up on the following assumptions: 
1. Heat and mass transfer in a TSS are formalized using the representative temperature of the 
saline water, trough and tubular cover. 
2. Water vapour on the water surface is saturated. 
3. There is no water vapour leakage across the tubular cover. 
4. The absorption of the solar radiation in the humid air is negligibly small. 
 
2.2.2. Mass balance equation 
 
Mass balance equation for saline water in trough is given in equation (1) 
 
  
w
evpw m
t
h




                                                             (1) 
 
2.2.3 Energy balance equations 
 
Energy balance equations for saline water, trough and tubular cover are given in equation (2), (3) 
and (4), respectively. 
 986 
rwcwewctww
w
w QQQQRt
TCV 

)(                     (2) 
ctcctwtr
tr
tr QQRt
TCV 

)(                                         (3)  
rcccrwctccwcdcc
c
c QQQQQQRt
TCV 

)(    (4)  
Where, 
C  : Specific heat capacity (J/Kg) 
hw  : Depth of water in the trough (m) 
Rw  : Solar radiation adsorbed by saline water (J/s) 
Rtr : Solar radiation adsorbed by trough (J/s)  
Rc  : Solar radiation adsorbed by tubular cover (J/s) 
mevp  : Evaporation flux (Kg/m2-s) 
Qcc  : Convective heat transferred between cover and atmosphere (J/s) 
Qcdc  : Convective heat transferred between cover and water (J/s) 
Qcw  : Convective heat transferred between water surface and cover (J/s) 
Qew : Evaporative heat transferred from water surface and cover (J/s) 
Qrc : Radiative heat transferred between tubular cover and atmosphere (J/s) 
Qrw : Radiative heat transferred between tubular cover and water surface (J/s) 
Qctc : Convective heat transferred between trough and cover (J/s) 
Qctw : Convective heat transferred between trough and water (J/s) 
Rs : Solar radiation (W/m2) 
T : Temperature (℃) 
ρw : Density of water (Kg/m3) 
Vw : Volume of water (m3) 
The subscripts a, c, t and w denote atmosphere, tubular cover, trough and saline water, 
respectively. 
  
2.3 Field experiment 
 
The field experiment was carried out on the constructed tubular solar still from January 01 to 
April 30, 2011. A wooden frame was used to support tubular solar still so that free circulation of 
air occurs beneath the TSS. The vessel for distilled water collection was put in a wooden box in 
order to collect the distilled water from the tubular solar still accurately. One end of tubular solar 
still can be opened to feed raw water into the trough and to remove the accumulated saline into 
the trough. The depth of solution into the trough was kept low to increase water temperature and 
daily production rate. The daily output of distilled water from the tubular solar still is collected 
approximately two hour after sunset. The hourly output and ambient air temperature was 
measured in some typical days (2, 3 and 10 May, 2011) to show the effect of air temperature on 
productivity. Hourly data of water temperature, humid-air temperature, air temperature and 
productivity is also collected in 10 May, 2011. Figure 3 shows, the photograph of the field 
experiment. The instrumental set up for the collection of data of water temperature, temperature 
between cover and water surface (humid-air temperature) and ambient air temperature are shown 
in Figure 4.   
 987 
 
 
Figure 3 Photograph of field experiment 
 
 
 
Figure 4 Experimental set up for temperature measurement 
 
2.4. Data collection 
 
The output of distilled water from the tubular solar still is collected everyday approximately two 
hour after sunset from 01 January to 30 April, 2011. The hourly output is also collected in some 
typical days (2 and 3 May, 2011). Table 1 shows, the daily production of distilled water from the 
tubular solar still. Table 2 shows, the hourly production of distilled water for tubular solar still. 
Table 3 shows, the water temperature, humid-air temperature, air temperature and distillate output 
of tubular solar still in 10 May, 2011. 
 
Thermometer 
for measuring 
air temperature   
Thermometer for 
measuring water 
temperature  
Thermometer for 
measuring humid-  
air temperature   
Tubular cover inside 
rectangular trough Collection Vessel 
inside the wooden 
 988 
Table 1 Daily distilled water production of tubular solar still from January to April, 2011 
 
Daily distilled water production  (Lit./day) Day 
 January February March April 
1 0.241 0.293 0.338 0.503 
2 0.235 0.237 0.472 0.338 
3 0.296 0.212 0.397 0.319 
4 0.164 0.233 0.408 0.293 
5 0.282 0.306 0.319 0.217 
6 0.247 0.293 0.410 0.338 
7 0.244 0.202 0.481 0.345 
8 0.251 0.303 0.437 0.293 
9 0.273 0.306 0.449 0.247 
10 0.280 0.358 0.416 0.205 
11 0.079 0.360 0.176 0.317 
12 0.176 0.265 0.374 0.316 
13 0.205 0.286 0.436 0.299 
14 0.118 0.326 0.293 0.234 
15 0.159 0.355 0.273 0.364 
16 0.153 0.303 0.364 0.341 
17 0.228 0.287 0.449 0.325 
18 0.231 0.241 0.390 0.371 
19 0.213 0.286 0.377 0.452 
20 0.241 0.111 0.345 0.325 
21 0.199 0.039 0.338 0.428 
22 0.243 0.341 0.291 0.294 
23 0.190 0.347 0.408 0.333 
24 0.200 0.356 0.363 0.484 
25 0.252 0.391 0.267 0.291 
26 0.235 0.381 0.382 0.320 
27 0.172 0.289 0.456 0.321 
28 0.273 0.429 0.273 0.352 
29 0.228 - 0.391 0.425 
30 0.216 - 0.346 0.267 
31 0.225 - 0.389 - 
 
 
 989 
Table 2 Hourly distilled water production from the tubular solar still 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 3 Water temperatures, temperature between cover and water surface (humid-air 
temperature), air temperature and distillate output of tubular solar still in 10 May, 
2011 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
At 02/05/2011 At 03/05/2011 
Time Air 
Tem. (°C) 
Hourly 
Pro. (Lit/hr.) 
Air 
Tem. (°C) 
Hourly 
Pro. (Lit/hr.) 
07.00 am 30.1 0.000 26.3 0.000 
08.00 am 31.1 0.000 31.3 0.000 
09.00 am 34.4 0.003 33.0 0.008 
10.00 am 35.0 0.004 38.1 0.026 
11.00 am 39.1 0.014 38.3 0.025 
12.00 am 33.6 0.054 38.7 0.030 
01.00 pm 34.7 0.075 37.0 0.033 
02.00 pm 35.5 0.042 34.2 0.070 
03.00 pm 36.1 0.048 35.1 0.060 
04.00 pm 34.7 0.030 32.8 0.024 
05.00 pm 32.2 0.028 31.0 0.031 
06.00 pm 29.5 0.018 30.0 0.010 
07.00 pm 28.1 0.004 29.2 0.008 
08.00 pm 27.5 0.004 28.2 0.003 
09.00pm 26.3 0.000 27.6 0.000 
Temperature (◦C) 
Time Water Humid-air Ambient  air 
Distillate 
output 
(Lit/hr.) 
07.00 am 28 26 31 0.000 
08.00 am 37 33 31 0.005 
09.00 am 49 43 33 0.017 
10.00 am 58 53 35 0.022 
11.00 am 57 52 35 0.047 
12.00 am 59 54 36 0.055 
01.00 pm 61 55 38 0.053 
02.00 pm 56 52 38 0.073 
03.00 pm 53 50 36 0.050 
04.00 pm 51 47 35 0.048 
05.00 pm 47 41 35 0.027 
06.00 pm 40 33 33 0.023 
07.00 pm 34 29 32 0.006 
08.00 pm 33 28 31 0.005 
09.00 pm 30 26 29 0.000 
 990 
3. Data Analysis, Results and Discussions 
 
3.1. Data analysis 
 
Data of Table 1, 2 and 3 were used to calculate the daily and hourly production rate per unit 
surface area of the trough. Table 4 shows, the daily production rate of tubular solar still from 01 
January to 30 April, 2011. Table 5 shows, the hourly production rate of tubular solar still for some 
typical days (2, 3 and 10 May, 2011). 
 
Table 4 Daily distilled water production rate of TSS for January to April, 2011 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Daily distilled water production  (Lit/m2-day) Day 
January February March April 
1 1.507 1.824 2.113 3.146 
2 1.47 1.477 2.947 2.113 
3 1.854 1.322 2.474 1.986 
4 1.027 1.455 2.548 1.824 
5 1.765 1.906 1.994 1.359 
6 1.544 1.824 2.556 2.113 
7 1.529 1.264 3.007 2.149 
8 1.567 1.892 2.733 1.824 
9 1.707 1.906 2.799 1.544 
10 1.751 2.231 2.6 1.286 
11 0.495 2.253 1.093 1.98 
12 1.101 1.655 2.341 1.972 
13 1.286 1.788 2.718 1.869 
14 0.738 2.038 1.832 1.463 
15 0.989 2.217 1.707 2.275 
16 0.961 1.892 2.275 2.127 
17 1.418 1.795 2.799 2.032 
18 1.448 1.507 2.438 2.311 
19 1.33 1.788 2.357 2.829 
20 1.507 0.694 2.149 2.032 
21 1.242 0.244 2.113 2.674 
22 1.521 2.127 1.817 1.84 
23 1.19 2.171 2.548 2.083 
24 1.248 2.223 2.267 3.021 
25 1.573 2.445 1.661 1.817 
26 1.47 2.379 2.386 2.002 
27 1.071 1.802 2.851 2.009 
28 1.707 2.682 1.707 2.201 
29 1.426 - 2.445 2.659 
30 1.352 - 2.165 1.669 
31 1.404 - 2.43 - 
 991 
Table 5 Hourly distilled water production rate of tubular solar still 
 
Production rate (lit/m2-hr) Time 
At 02/05/2011 At 03/05/2011 At 10/05/2011 
07.00 am 0.000 0.000 0.000 
08.00 am 0.000 0.000 0.031 
09.00 am 0.019 0.050 0.106 
10.00 am 0.025 0.163 0.138 
11.00 am 0.088 0.156 0.294 
12.00 am 0.338 0.188 0.344 
01.00 pm 0.469 0.206 0.331 
02.00 pm 0.263 0.438 0.456 
03.00 pm 0.300 0.375 0.313 
04.00 pm 0.188 0.150 0.300 
05.00 pm 0.175 0.194 0.169 
06.00 pm 0.113 0.063 0.144 
07.00 pm 0.025 0.050 0.038 
08.00 pm 0.025 0.019 0.031 
09.00 pm 0.000 0.000 0.000 
 
 
3.2. Results and discussions 
 
Figure 5 shows, daily distilled output per unit surface area of the trough of tubular solar still from 
January 01 to April 30, 2011. In Figure 5, it is evident that daily distilled output increases 
gradually approximately from January to mid of March then gradually decreases up to mid of 
April and therefore increases again. The average daily production rate of the tubular solar still is 
0.302 lit/day (1.885 lit/m2-day). The daily production rate can be expressed by the linear 
regression equation (5). This regression equation is only valid for month January to April, 2011. 
 P = 1.3817 + 0.00844 RD                                                      (5) 
Where,   
P = Productivity rate of distilled water (Lit/m2-day)  
RD = Rank of the day in which 1 is for January 01 and 120 for April 30. 
The variations of daily average productivity for different months for tubular solar still are shown 
in Figure 6. It is observe that the average daily production rate is maximum for the month March 
and minimum for January. The average daily production rates of tubular solar still were 1.361, 
1.813, 2.317 and 2.074 lit/m2-day, respectively for the months January to April.  
 
 992 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5 Variation of daily productivity (lit/m2-day) for tubular solar still 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6 Variation of average daily productivity in different months for tubular solar still 
 
Figure 7 shows, the variation in hourly production rate for different ambient air temperature in 
some typical days (2, 3 and 10 May, 2011). From Figure 7, it is evident that the hourly production 
becomes maximum after one or two hour of maximum ambient air temperature. It was also 
observed from the figure that all temperatures and hourly production slopes are steeper in the 
morning than that of afternoon. 
J a n u a r y F e b r u a r y M a r c h  A p r il
0
0 .5
1 .0
1 .5
2 .0
2 .5
3 .0
A
ve
ra
ge
 p
ro
du
ct
iv
ity
 (l
it/
m
2 -d
ay
)
M o n th
0 3 0 6 0 9 0 1 2 0
0
1
2
3
4
P =  1 .3 8 1 7 + 0 .0 0 8 4 4 R
D
J a n u a r y         F e b r u a r y         M a r c h        A p r il
 
D
ist
ill
ed
 o
ut
pu
t (
lit
/m
2 -d
ay
)
T im e  (D a y )
D a ta  c o lle c t io n  fr o m  J a n u a r y  0 1  to  A p r il  3 0 , 2 0 1 1
 993 
 
Figure 7 Hourly variations of productivity and ambient air temperature for the TSS 
 
Figure 8 shows, the variation of water temperature, humid air temperature, air temperature and 
hourly production rate in 10 May, 2011.  
 
 
Figure 8 Hourly variations of production rate and tem. parameters for the TSS in 10 May, 2011 
 
From the figure, it is observe that all air temperature rise rapidly from the morning to noon, peak 
7 8 9 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6 1 7 1 8 1 9 2 0 2 1
0
1 0
2 0
3 0
4 0
5 0
6 0
7 0
8 0
9 0
 
 T
em
pe
ra
tu
re
 (°
C
)
p ma m
T im e  o f  D a y  (h r )
 W a t e r  te m p e r a tu r e  o C
 H u m id  a ir  te m p e r a tu r e o C
 A ir  te m p e r a tu r e o C
 
0
0 .2
0 .4
0 .6
0 .8
1 .0
1 .2
 
 
 D
ist
ill
ed
 o
ut
pu
t (
lil
/m
2 -h
r)  D is t il le d  o u t p u t  (L it /m 2- h r )
7 8 9 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6 1 7 1 8 1 9 2 0 2 1
2 0
2 5
3 0
3 5
4 0
4 5
5 0
A ir  te m p .     P ro d u c t iv ity
 A
ir 
te
m
pe
ra
tu
re
 (0
C)
 
 
T im e  o f  D a y  (h o u r )
 
 
 
0
0 .2
0 .4
0 .6
0 .8
1 .0
p ma m
 
 
Pr
od
uc
tiv
ity
 (l
it/
m
2 /h
r)
 M a y  0 2
 M a y  0 3
 M a y  1 0
 994 
approximately at 1.00 pm and then decline gradually. The hourly production rate is also rise gradually from 
morning to noon then decline gradually. 
 
3.3 Cost Analysis 
 
Table 6 Cost estimation of tubular solar still 
 
SL. No. Item  Unit Rate Quantity Amount (Tk) 
1 G. I. wire m 4.5 12 54 
2 Trough nos. -- 1 16 
3 Polythene     30 
4 Wooden frame       40 
Total = Tk. 140.00 
 
If we consider design life of tubular solar still is 4 years and in a year 70% time one can get the 
calculated average daily output (i.e. 0.302lit/day) then, 
The production of water in the design life =0.302×365×0.70×4 =308.64 Lit. 
Production cost of water = (140 /308.64) =Tk. 0.453 /lit. 
 
4. Conclusions: 
 
It is concluded that the design and construction of tubular solar still is very simple and the 
construction cost is very low. The technology involved in desalination of saline water using solar 
energy is relatively simple, the fabrication of component is very simple and maintenance can be 
carried out by households. The analysis shows that the production rate of a solar still is mainly 
depend on the intensity of solar radiation and the production rate will be higher in the summer 
season. All temperatures and hourly production slopes are steeper in the morning than that of 
afternoon. The hourly production rate is also rise gradually with air temperature from morning to 
noon then decline gradually. It is founded that average daily distilled output of Tubular solar still 
increases for the months January to March except for the month April. The average daily 
production rates of tubular solar still were 1.361, 1.813, 2.317 and 2.074 lit/m2-day, respectively 
for the months January to April. It is founded that the average daily production rate of tubular 
solar still was 0.302lit/day (1.885lit/m2-day) and the production cost of distilled water was 
Tk.0.453/lit. Since the construction, operation and maintenance of tubular solar still is easier so, 
one can easily construct a tubular solar still using locally available material to produce fresh 
water from saline water in the remote, coastal and arid areas to meet small scale fresh water 
demand.  
 
Acknowledgements 
 
The authors wish to express their acknowledgements to the Department of Civil Engineering, 
Khulna University of Engineering & Technology (KUET), Khulna, Bangladesh for extending all 
sorts of supports for this study. 
 
 995 
References 
 
Agha, K.R., Wahab, M.A., Mansouri, K.EL. (2005). Potential of Solar Desalination in the Arid 
States of North Africa and the Middle East. Renewable Energy Research and Water 
Desalination, Tripoli – Libya. 
Ahmed, M.F. and Rahman, M.M. (2000). Water Supply & Sanitation, International Training 
Network (ITN), Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technology (BUET), Bangladesh. 
Barlow, M. and Clark, T. (2002). Blue Gold, New Press, New York.   
Hassan, M.Q., Rahman, M.M., Islam, M.S. and Shamsad, S.Z.K.M. (1998). Effects of Salinity on 
the Hydrogeo-Environment of Khulna City and Mongla Port Areas of Bangladesh, Dhaka 
University Journal of Biological Sciences, vol. 7(2), pp.113-127. 
Kalogirou, S.A.(2004). Seawater desalination using renewable energy sources. Progress in 
Energy and Combustion Science, Nicosia, Cyprus. 
Leitner, G.F. (1998). Int.Desalination and Water Reuse Quart. 
Malik, M.A.S., Tiwari, G.N., Kumar, A. and Sodha, M.S. (1982). A practical study of a wide 
range of stills and their optimum design, construction and performance. Solar Distillation, 
First edition, Pergamon Press. 
Nickson, R.T., McArthur, J.M., Shrestha, B., Kyaw-Nyint, T.O., and Lowry, D. (2005). Arsenic 
and other Drinking Water Quality Issues, Muzaffargarh District, Pakistan. Appl Geochem 
vol.20, pp. 55–68. 
Ramkumar, T. and Anita Mary, I. (2010). Hydrogeochemical Quality of Groundwater in 
Vedaraniyam Town, Tamil Nadu, India. Journal of Environmental and Earth Sciences, vol. 2, 
pp. 44-48. 
 
996 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
BARRIERS IN ADOPTING ENERGY EFFICIENCY IN RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS OF 
DHAKA, BANGLADESH 
 
 
Tahmina Ahsan1 
 
 
ABSTRACT: A previous study by the author identified passive energy design features that can 
be incorporated in residential buildings of Dhaka to make them energy efficient. This study aimed 
at identifying changes in the design process that can affect energy efficiency in residential 
buildings by studying the different roles of developers, architects, interior designers, land owners 
(clients) and residents that can act as a barrier in achieving energy efficiency in residential 
buildings. 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Bangladesh is a small but one of the most densely populated countries in the world. About 150 
million people live in 58000 square kilometres (Saleque, 2008). Dhaka, the capital of Bangladesh, 
has come to be known as a fast growing megacity of South Asia in recent times. The energy 
infrastructure of Bangladesh is quite small, insufficient and poorly managed (Temple in 
Mozumder and Marathe, 2007). According to the report of Dhaka Mirror (2009), the country has 
been experiencing a shortfall of about 1200 MW of electricity against the demand of 4500 MW. 
The residential buildings provided by the developers in Dhaka do not focus on energy efficiency. 
In fact, the government of Bangladesh has not adopted building energy codes in any form for 
building construction, despite the recognized fact that worldwide, 30%-40 % of all primary 
energy is used in buildings (UNEP, 2007). Residential buildings are designed without giving due 
importance to the parameters that are responsible for enabling thermal comfort without much 
dependence on energy use. Dependence on artificial lighting and ventilation is common in all 
apartments.  
   A previous study by the author (Ahsan & Svane, 2009) has formulated the adoption of the 
following energy efficient design features for Dhaka: 
1. Cooling load can be reduced by 7%- 10% by doubling the thickness of external walls with 
280 mm brick walls including an air cavity of 50 mm on east and west facades instead of 125 
mm brick external walls as is the general practice. 
2. The use of hollow clay tiles (HCT) in place of weathering course for roofs can save 18% - 
30% of cooling energy (Vijaykumar and Srinivasan in Vijaykumar et al., 2007). 
 
 
                                                        
1Assistant Professor, Department of Architecture, Stamford University Bangladesh, Dhaka, Bangladesh.  
tahminaahsan25@yahoo.com  
997 
 
3. Optimum total energy savings of 14 %, 11%, 6% and 8% can be obtained by using horizontal 
overhang ratio of 1.3 for east orientations, 1.2 for west orientations, 1 for north orientations 
and 1 for south orientations respectively. The energy savings for all the orientations together 
sum up to 39%. (Ossen et al., 2005). 
   If the building were to adopt the energy efficient features discussed above, then the cooling 
energy would be reduced by 64%. The 64% reduction is a summation of the lower range energy 
saving values of all the energy efficient features. Despite the effectiveness of these features, there 
are barriers that may impede the construction of energy efficient buildings.  
 
 
2. Aims and Methodology 
 
The study aims at identifying changes in the design process that can affect energy efficiency in 
residential buildings by attempting to answer the research question:    What are the different 
roles of developers, architects, interior designers, clients/land owners and residents that can act as 
a barrier in achieving energy efficiency in the residential buildings of Dhaka? 
   In order to answer the research question, the study was developed through a fieldwork in 
Dhaka that consisted of quantitative and qualitative data by observing multi-unit residential 
buildings, interviewing developers, architects, tenants and owners of multi-unit residential 
buildings and other concerned people. 
 
 
3. Results 
 
By observing the residential buildings in Dhaka, it seems architects, interior designers and 
developers are still not aware of the role they can play in designing energy efficient buildings. 
Architects are under constant pressure from the developers and clients to design multi-unit 
residential buildings with maximum space utilization, more bedrooms per flat/unit and good 
project economy. They therefore concentrate mainly on unit/flat size per building, provision of 
more bedrooms per flat/unit, kitchen complex (kitchen, kitchen balcony, storeroom, maid’s room 
and maid toilet) and provision of one car parking for each flat/unit and treatment of the front 
facade. 
  Energy efficient building features for residential buildings in Dhaka have been identified in a 
previous study by the author. The study also shows the proficiency of these energy efficient 
features. Despite the effectiveness of these features, there are barriers that may impede the 
construction of energy efficient buildings. Based on interviews, observations of the way 
architects, developers and interior designers work and how the clients behave, the roles of these 
actors involved in the process of designing energy efficient building are scrutinized below to 
identify the barriers.  
 
3.1. Role of Architect 
 
Like architects, developers too are not fully aware of the urgency of the energy crisis in 
Bangladesh. Neither are they aware that the residential building sector in Dhaka uses almost 45% 
of the electricity generated. They lack information and technical skills to construct energy 
efficient buildings. 
   Developers are primarily interested in maximizing the net saleable area and in the speedy 
998 
 
completion of the building. Future operating costs, which are borne by prospective occupants of 
the building, are not key considerations because the developers do not take long term 
responsibilities; their role is limited to the moment the flat is handed over to the client.From 
previous experience of the real estate market and from interviews with developers and architects, 
it can be said that buildings are generally designed without the much needed proper shading 
devices that are very energy efficient because the developers want to save costs.  Even though 
cavity walls and walls of increased thickness are known to be energy efficient, such features are 
unlikely to be adopted by developers because of their increased construction costs and reduced 
room sizes. Hollow clay tiles on the roof have been found to reduce the cooling load and it is the 
developer who would decide whether he/she would incur the small extra costs to have an energy 
efficient building. Typical residential buildings constructed by most developers represent 
matchboxes with some sort of ornamentation on the front facade. Buildings are designed without 
open spaces and voids because apartments are charged per square footage and every given up 
space would incur a loss in price. 
 
3.2. Role of developer 
 
Like architects, developers too are not fully aware of the urgency of the energy crisis in 
Bangladesh. Neither are they aware that the residential building sector in Dhaka uses almost 45% 
of the electricity generated. They lack information and technical skills to construct energy 
efficient buildings.Developers are primarily interested in maximizing the net saleable area and in 
the speedy completion of the building. Future operating costs, which are borne by prospective 
occupants of the building, are not key considerations because the developers do not take long 
term responsibilities; their role is limited to the moment the flat is handed over to the client.From 
previous experience of the real estate market and from interviews with developers and architects, 
it can be said that buildings are generally designed without the much needed proper shading 
devices that are very energy efficient because the developers want to save costs.  Even though 
cavity walls and walls of increased thickness are known to be energy efficient, such features are 
unlikely to be adopted by developers because of their increased construction costs and reduced 
room sizes. Hollow clay tiles on the roof have been found to reduce the cooling load and it is the 
developer who would decide whether he/she would incur the small extra costs to have an energy 
efficient building. Typical residential buildings constructed by most developers represent 
matchboxes with some sort of ornamentation on the front facade. Buildings are designed without 
open spaces and voids because apartments are charged per square footage and every given up 
space would incur a loss in price. 
 
3.3. Role of interior designer 
 
The interior designers are hired by the owners of the flats and they work in alliance with the 
owners, without any sort of collaboration with the architects who designed the building. They too 
are unaware of the necessity and potentials of energy efficient design solutions. As the interior 
designers were not involved in the design stage and came in later, they are not aware of the 
energy efficient design features that the architect may have designed. Owners of the flats usually 
want a grand interior with lots of decorative lights to symbolize their status and lifestyle. Use of 
fancy lights for interiors has become a symbolic culture and practise. As the interior designers are 
appointed by the owners, they are under the obligation to listen to the requirements put forth by 
999 
 
the owners; otherwise they would lose their job. Hence, the interior designers put in plenty of 
lights with different shades to create the symbolic and dramatic effect as desired by the owners of 
the flats. The interiors designers may also change the orientation and size of openings on all walls 
except the front facade as the developers do not allow a change in design on the front facade. 
 
3.4. Role of clients (land owners) and residents 
 
Clients too are unaware of the role they can play in mitigating the energy crisis of Bangladesh. 
They need to be explained about the necessity of energy efficient buildings. Like developers, land 
owners or clients are also interested in maximum profits through lower construction costs and 
maximum utilization of land. The different energy efficient features can only be implemented if 
the clients are prepared to pay the extra costs and compromise with reduced floor area. Barriers in 
the form of behavioural characteristics of residents, their lifestyle and split incentives can also 
hamper the energy efficiency of residential buildings and are discussed as follows:  
 Behavioural characteristics of residents 
Even if a building is designed with energy efficient features, behavioural characteristics of 
individuals are in fact a great hindrance to achieving energy efficiency in residential buildings. 
Kanyama and Linden (2006) have asserted that energy use in the home may be reduced by 20% 
through changes in behaviour. However, it should also be noted that their results are from a 
different cultural setting. Small, but easy practices such as switching off the lights when leaving a 
room are often ignored. Using higher setpoint temperatures for air conditioners instead of lower 
temperatures like 24°C, can also achieve energy efficiency (Tham, 1993). According to Tham 
(1993), each degree Celsius rise in setpoint temperature represents a saving of approximately 6% 
in both cooling energy and total energy use. 
 Lifestyle of residents 
The lifestyle of the higher income groups contradicts with the notion of energy efficiency. In such 
cases, a well-designed energy efficient building can fall short of its endeavour. For example, 
using air conditioners in each and every room, latest and biggest appliances irrespective of their 
energy use and plenty of trendy lights such as spotlights, chandeliers in an interior decorated 
house is a matter of status symbol for the upper income groups. 
 Split incentives 
Split incentives occur when costs and benefits of investing in energy efficiency improvements are 
split between two parties (Williams, 2008). Flat owners do not always reside in the flats they buy. 
They rent the flats to tenants. The owners are therefore not interested in energy efficient design 
features as they are not the end users and would not bear the energy costs. 
 
4. Conclusion and Recommendation 
 
Different roles of developers, architects, interior designers and owners that act as barriers in 
achieving energy efficiency in residential buildings have been discussed above. These barriers 
can be overcome by the following changes in design practice.Architects and developers need to 
learn about the importance and problems of achieving energy efficiency in residential buildings 
and the opportunities of addressing them. The architects can learn about these issues at the 
university or through journals. The Institute of Architects and the regulations in Dhaka City 
Building Construction Act can pressurize the architects and developers to learn about the issues 
related to energy efficient residential buildings and then based on that knowledge, they can act 
differently.  
1000 
 
The architects first need to brief the developers and clients on the urgency of energy efficiency in 
residential buildings. Both developers and clients need to be explained that the energy efficient 
design features such as doubling external wall on east and west facades, use of appropriate 
shading devices and use of hollow clay tiles on roof reduce the cooling energy by 64%. Only if 
the developers and clients are convinced and agree to compromise with floor area and 
construction costs, the energy efficient features can be adopted. Clients should be made to 
understand that though energy efficient features may appear costly at the initial stage, they can 
bring back returns and are profitable in the end. Developers should take more responsibility and 
should not be concerned with maximum utilization of land and profitability. Instead, they should 
focus on providing open space and greenery. They should understand that the provision of such 
aspects not only adds value to a land but also has a role in energy efficiency.As interior designers 
do not have any collaboration with the architect and can unknowingly end up in changing the 
interior in such a way that the flat is no longer energy efficient. Collaboration between architect, 
interior designer, developer and the client can help in achieving the overall target of designing 
energy efficient residential buildings. Once the building has reached a stage where interior 
designers are hired by the clients, all the actors involved need to sit together. The architect can 
then explain the energy efficient features used and can also recommend the interior designers and 
clients to use energy efficient lights and less trendy lights for the interiors. Once influenced by 
the architect, the interior designer can continue to explain the importance of energy efficiency to 
clients and motivate them into using less trendy lights and more energy efficient lights. Another 
option can be that developers integrate interior design of the flats as a part of the building design 
process. The developers can recruit interior designers or they can also have the interiors done by 
the architect who designed the building.It can thus be concluded that the process of designing 
energy efficient residential buildings is not a ‘one-man’s show’. It is just not the architect who is 
responsible for designing energy efficient residential buildings and changing the design practice. 
Developers, interior designers and the clients are the other actors who can bring a change in the 
design practice. All the actors are closely intertwined. The architect, with increased knowledge 
and awareness can be the initiator of designing energy efficient buildings and the change in 
design practice. The architect should influence the developer, interior designer and the client. 
Once influenced by the architect, the interior designer should further motivate the client. Finally, 
it depends on the client and the developer. If the client and developer can compromise with 
construction cost, change their concept of making most of the floor area and if the client can 
change her/ his culture of using more and more air conditioners and flashy lights, it would be 
possible to design energy efficient residential buildings in Dhaka.In addition to overcoming the 
barriers in energy efficiency, building codes need to be developed by The Dhaka City Building 
Construction Act to promote and influence energy efficiency in buildings. The Dhaka City 
Building Construction Act can formulate building regulations for energy efficient residential 
buildings. These regulations or building codes would pressurize the developers, the architects and 
the land owners or the clients to overcome the barriers and implement the energy efficient design 
features in the residential buildings of Dhaka. The focus of the codes should be to incorporate 
energy efficient design features right from the design stage. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1001 
 
References 
 
Ahsan, T. & Svane O. (2010). Energy-Efficient Design Features for Residential Buildings in 
Tropical Climates: The Context of Dhaka, Bangladesh. Proceedings of SAUD 2010 
Conference. University of Jordan.. 
Dhaka Mirror. (2009). Sufferings of City Dwellers Mount Due to Severe Power Crisis. [Online]. 
Available: http://www.dhakamirror.com/?p=3428. [accessed10 March, 2009]. 
Kanyama, A.C & Lindén, A.L. (2007). Energy Efficiency in Residences- Challenges for Women 
And Men in the North. Energy Policy, 35(4): 2163-2172. 
Mozumder,P. & Marathe, A. (2007). Viewpoint: Causality Relationship Between Electricity Use 
and GDP in Bangladesh. Energy Policy, 35(1): 395-402.  
Ossen, D.R., Ahmad, M.H. & Madros, N.H. (2005). Optimum Overhang Geometry for Building 
Energy Saving in Tropical Climates. Journal of Asian Architecture and Building Engineering, 
4(2): 563-570.  
Saleque, A.K.(2008). Bangladesh Energy Security – Entering Red Zone. [Online]. 
Available:http://energybangla.com/index.php?mod=article&cat=SomethingtoSay&article=10
5 [accessed 17 December, 2008] 
Tham, K.W. (1993). Conserving Energy without Sacrificing Thermal Comfort. Building and  
Environment, 28(3): 287-299. 
UNEP. (2007). Buildings and Climate Change: Status, Challenges and Opportunities. United 
Nations Environment Programme.  
Vijaykumar, K.C.K., Srinivasan, P.S.S. & Dhandapani, S. (2007). A Performance of Hollow Clay 
Tile (HCT) Laid Reinforced Cement Concrete (RCC) Roof for Tropical Summer Climates. 
Energy and Buildings, 39 (8): 886-892.  
Williams, B.E. (2008). Overcoming Barriers to Energy Efficiency for Rental Housing. Master’s 
thesis.  
 
 
 
 
 
1002 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
HOME FOR THE HOMELESS: A SENSE OF BELONGING 
 
 
M Ajmeri Nusrat Shoma1 and Ashik Vaskor Mannan 2  
 
 
ABSTRACT: Thousands of people in Dhaka city live without any roof. It is a unique 
characteristic of Metropolitan Dhaka- the largest urban area in Bangladesh. This country has 
experienced one of the highest urban population growth rates in last three decades. Street 
dwellers are among the most deprived people in urban areas in terms of living conditions, access 
to basic facilities and health indicators. This is perhaps a synthesized outcome of shear urban 
poverty and failing of state provisions. The consequence reveals through sleeping on footpath. 
These street sleepers could not be covered by the informal sector housing lacking their financial 
ability to rent a shelter in slum or squatter. They referred street as their home and their sense of 
belonging emerged spontaneously. After daylong works they return to their selected places on 
footpath at night. This home on street is without any physical entity in terms of roof or shelter.  
But as home is not only confined to a physical entity, rather it has social, cultural, psychological 
dimensions; a sense of belonging is generated possibly to make their livelihood sustainable. Thus 
this paper will characterize the ‘street sleeper’ home by exploring the multi-dimensional meaning 
of home. It tries to give the definition of our home, the definition of our belonging. 
 
Keywords: Sense of belonging, home, urban, street 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Dhaka, the capital city of Bangladesh is the largest urban area of this country. It starts its journey 
about 400 years ago by the side of river Buriganga. It was a strategic decision by the Mughals 
considering the economic, navigation and security potentials of the river Buriganga which 
surrounded parts of Dhaka. Since then the civilization of Dhaka city with its history, livelihood, 
culture and heritage have been largely shaped by this small but important river. Dhaka emerged 
as an important strategic and business centre along the river Buriganga at the beginning of 
Muslim rule in 13th century. Dhaka is in a continuous process of urban expansion till today. 
Though in the British rule city’s population shrank dramatically, in the post independence period 
has seen a massive growth of the population, attacking migrant workers from rural areas. Now 
Dhaka city accommodates major share of urban population. Due to the concentration of both 
                                                        
1Lecturer, Department of Architecture, American International University Bangladesh [ aiub].  
ajmerinusrat@aiub.edu 
2Assistant Professor, Department of Architecture, American International University Bangladesh [ aiub].  
ashikvaskor@aiub.com, ashikvaskor@yahoo.com. 
1003 
 
domestic and foreign investment this is experiencing massive migration from the rural population. 
According to 2001 census, Dhaka Statistical Metropolitan Area (SMA) has 10.7 million people, 
which is 37.45% of total population of Bangladesh (BBS 2003). This country has experienced 
one of the highest urban population growth rates in the last three decades, at more than 6% per 
year, which compares with a national population growth rate of about 1.5% per year (Perry et al 
2007 cited in Uddin et al, p. 386). But the relative required socio-economic infrastructure has not 
grown proportionately.Significant portions of Dhaka city’s population are living in slums and 
squatter settlements and are experiencing extremely low living standards, low productivity and 
low standards. Street sleepers are the most deprived among this urban poor in terms of living 
conditions, access to basic facilities and employment. They are homeless people as they do not 
have any home, which affect them more than any others. They lack social identity which hinders 
their access to job, education and healthcare. But yet sleeping on the street is an urban reality and 
it is continuing. Street sleepers’ livelihood is comprised of all daily life activities like any other 
person. They sleep, cook, eat, perform other household works from washing, cleaning to 
grooming, they chat, rest, socialize and have entertainment like any other person, but all these 
activities take place on street, footpath and adjacent areas rather than in a home. Performing 
household works surrounding the street may generate a sense of home and a sense of belonging. 
It is a unique home for the street sleepers, the homeless people.   
 
 
2. Methodology 
 
This paper seeks to look into the concept of home into the context of homelessness. A particular 
type of homelessness, which is the street sleepers are in-depth interviewed here to find out their 
notion of home in their daily life. Other supporting instrument like participant observation, focus 
group discussion, photographs, videos and documents are used to characterize the street sleepers’ 
home. This paper will first discuss about the multi-dimensional meaning of home. Then it will 
throw some light on the definition of street sleepers, what kind of homeless people they are and 
finally it tries to analyze their home in light of the multidimensional meaning of home. 
 
3. Home  
The ‘home’ is seen to be at once concrete and abstract; it is a multidimensional concept 
interpreted in terms of place, feelings and emotions, practices, as a state of being, or sense of 
place. Rejecting the binary oppositions that were long used to define the home, the home is seen 
as porous and contested rather than viewed as a fixed, bounded, and static location. Like any term 
or experience, the home begets its own negation and a self-constitutive practice.Homelessness is 
a direct consequence of poverty and the grossly unequal distribution of wealth and power, both 
globally and nationally. Despite a rich variety of literature on homelessness in the developed 
world and a parallel set of debates in relation to the developing world, there has been little cross-
debate between these forums. This is not surprising given the inherent economic, social and 
cultural differences between these contexts. Nonetheless, this paper argues there is value in 
reflecting on the meaning of homelessness from these differing perspectives.The concept ‘home’ 
varies across cultures, social groups, individuals and time. It also embodies many ideas such as 
comfort, belonging, identity and security. Different definitions could be addressed in literature. 
One of the earliest explanations of home is given by Hayward (1976) and this has been used for 
1004 
 
as a basis for further definitional updates (Lawrence 1987, Despres 1991). Despres (1991) 
distinguishes ten characteristics of home: permanence and continuity; centre for family 
relationships; security and control; mirror of personal views; influence and place for change; 
retreat from the surrounding world; personal status indicator; centre for activity ; concrete 
structure and  and a place to own. These studies reveal that the meaning of ‘home’ is not 
confined to the physical-spatial realm. They argued that the subjective dimension makes a house 
or a shelter a home. Social, psychological, affective behavioral issues are emphasized in the 
subjective interpretation of home.The very notion of ‘home’ calls forth deeply lodged feelings in 
almost everyone. While it seems to be attached to a universal human yearning for being grounded, 
for being safe, for belonging, it cannot be fenced in by a single definition or approach.According 
to Dovey (1985 cited in Tipple & Speak 2009, p. 4), home can be defined as a relationship 
between people and a place as he stated “an emotionally based and meaningful relationship 
between dwellers and their dwelling places”. From the qualitative evidence in Colombia, Kellett 
and Moore (2003) suggest that the owning some tangible structure called home, no matter how 
poorly constructed it may be, is very important for a household’s security, freedom, autonomy, 
well-being and opportunity. Their research suggests that homeless people also have home-making 
goals and evaluate qualities of home in their temporary accommodation. ‘Home’ and 
‘assimilation of home’ can be constituted by purely mental operation. Let us imagine ourselves in 
what is, no doubt, a familiar scenario. We walk into a hotel room, which is slightly unkempt. 
There is something about the room that is not very appealing. Initially we feel a sense of 
alienation. The room is unfamiliar. We do not feel at home in it. Nevertheless, we unpack our 
bags. We put out toiletries in the washroom, and hang up our clothes in the wardrobe. Gradually, 
as we lay out these familiar objects, the room seems less alienating. But what is more curious is 
that after a night or two spent sleeping in the room, what once seemed alienating and unfamiliar 
gradually becomes familiar, to the point where we being to feel almost at home- may be we even 
become slightly fond of the room, with its shabby furniture and musty smells. We start to feel 
cozy there, and develop a sense of attachment. Somehow- almost imperceptibly- a shift has 
happened. What one appeared foreign and alienating now appears familiar and homely. This is of 
course, a principle that operates not just in hotel rooms but in all forms of habitable space, from 
apartments to places, and in all urban conditions, from villages to cities. Environments which 
were once unfamiliar become appropriated within our symbolic horizons, so that with time they 
come to appear deeply familiar. Eventually any space will become familiar. 
“The inmate, it would seem, had so assimilated himself to his physical environment, and to see 
himself ‘reflected’ in that environment”’ (Leach 2006, p. 5). 
   This can be traced back to a broader characteristic of human existence. It is as though we 
human beings are dominated by a compulsion to return to the familiar, or, when there is nothing 
familiar to be found, to familiarize ourselves with the unfamiliar. So it is that we start adopting 
routines and familiar strategies. We return to the same place, as though these sites have been 
prescribed for us within the otherwise anonymous space of the universe. We human beings then 
seem to have the capacity gradually to ‘grow into’ our habitat, to familiarize ourselves with it, 
and eventually to find ourselves ‘at home’ there.This urge to make ourselves at home is an 
ongoing adapting process which never ceases. It is one that remains within a constant state of flux. 
Indeed, it is precisely the notion of ‘home’ that illustrates best the adaptability of the human 
organism. For ‘home’ is a floating concept which can always shift from place to place, even 
though it may take time to assert itself in each new location. Moving home is seldom easy. It 
might involve a deep wrench from a familiar and comforting world. Indeed, ‘Home’ is as much a 
1005 
 
repository of sounds and smells, such as the odor of drying raisins that Gaston Bachelard 
associates with his oneiric house, as it is visual images (Bachelard 1997).From this we can 
surmise that home, and operations performed at home, are linked intimately with human identity. 
This process involves a two way interaction. Not only do we grow into and become part of our 
environment, but our environment becomes part of us.  
   Home is “physically, psychologically and socially constructed in both ‘real’ and ‘ideal’ forms. 
It is where we construct and mange our relationship with the physical and social worlds. It 
represents not only how we live but who we are” (Somerville 1992, p. 530). 
   Home is, in Western culture, usually understood to be situated in space and time, a place to 
lay one’s head, but it becomes ‘home’ when it is inscribed with (social, psychological, and 
emotive) meaning for individuals and groups. While discussing both Despres (1991) and 
Someville (1992)’s approach, Tipple & Speak (2009, p.4) argue that ‘home’ as a place where a 
person is able to establish meaningful social relations with others through entertaining them 
his/her own space, where the person is withdraw from such relationships. According to them, 
home is “a should be” place where a person is able to define the space as their own, where they 
are able to control its form and shape and this may be through control of activities and of defining 
their privacy in terms of access to their space.Home is simultaneously concrete and abstract as 
the sense of home has both its tangible (physical environment) and non-tangible (non-
environmental issues such as identity) aspects (Rapoport 1995, pp.27-28). This multi dimensional 
concept is also interpreted in terms of feelings and emotions, practices, as a ‘state of being’ and 
‘sense of place’. Rapoport also saw the home in a perspective of interpretation of relation 
between individual and society and mediated by sets of affiliations including family, community, 
government, education, employment, religion and recreation. Collectively, these affiliations 
define and are defined by the ‘duties and claims’, ‘rights and obligations’ and the ‘social status 
and role of persons and groups’. They influence self, social and place identities and shapes how 
the concept of home is interpreted in specific situations in a given time. So, in this way, image of 
home depends on the insider or outsiders’ view- on actual persons experiencing or evaluating it 
(Rapoport 1995, p.28). 
 
4. Scenario of street sleepers 
Street sleepers are included in the homeless people. Homelessness is as wide as multidimensional 
because by the numerous perspectives it is defined in respect of different circumstances, culture 
and countries. In Bangladesh three types of urban homelessness have been identified by Ghafur 
(2004) which is based on residential circumstances. They are floating homelessness, situated 
homelessness and potential homelessness where street sleepers are included in the first one. 
Floating homelessness is based on the physical criterion of rooflessness. It refers to the people 
living on the streets or other public spaces without permanent shelters of their own. Floating 
homelessness are often street dwellers, pavement dwellers or destitute (Ghafur 2004, p.271). The 
several terms that often used to identify them are ‘floating population’ (BBS 1999, Siddique, et al. 
1986 ), ‘rootless people’, ‘street dwellers’, ‘pavement dwellers’ (Begum 1997) etc. The 
Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics (BBS) defined ‘floating population’ as “The mobile and vagrant 
category of rootless people who have no permanent dwelling units, however bad and who are 
found in the census night during 00.00-05.00 hours of 25th March, 1997 in the railway station, 
launch ghats (water transport terminals), bus stations, hat-bazaar (market places), mazar 
(shrines), the staircases of public/ government buildings, open spaces etc.” (BBS 1999, p.4).  
1006 
 
    
In this paper ‘street sleepers’ is referred to those people who are making their livelihood on the 
street and sleeps on pavement (footpath or other). Street sleepers are scattered all over Dhaka city 
in different locations. The characteristics of their livelihood are also different with respect of their 
locations. Alam & Rahman (2009, p.24) described some types of street sleepers according to 
some location but not all location in Dhaka city. This paper is only concerned with the street 
sleepers of green road who sleeps on footpath of green road. Their occupation is mostly 
housemaids, beggars, rickshaw pullers and waste paper picker.  
5. Street sleepers in Green Road 
While people are rushing for home at night after day long work, shopkeepers closing their shops 
but city lights are still on, Shima, a woman of twenty-eight is taking preparation to build a shelter 
for night stay on the footpath of Green Road with plastic sheets, mosquito net and some bricks. 
Her two children awaiting the home to be build for sleeping besides their mother. Shima have to 
wake up early in the morning before sunrise when the city is still under the curtain of darkness 
and get ready for the day. This is the reality of street life in Green Road, Dhaka. Not only Shima, 
around 6483 of street sleepers are living on the footpath of Green Road. Street sleepers here sleep 
on the wide footpath of both side of a major road. Being a mix used area, mostly row of shops 
make the edge. Not only shops, some residences, apartment buildings, hospitals, schools, garment 
factory buildings, hotels, restaurants, office buildings, shops, are also lined along this road. The 
footpath is occasionally elevated 20 cm-30 cm from the road level. Sometimes this footpath is 
covered by a projected upper storey. During night after the shops close and other daily activities 
are over for the day, these people make hasty preparation for night stay with a mosquito net or 
with a wide plastic sheet attached to the shop shutter and other end to some collected bricks. 
Some even do not have this preparation, they just put a brick under head and cover their body 
with rags and pass the night. 
  
Figure 1. Street Sleepers are sleeping in early morning inside their home in Green Road. 
6. Street Sleepers’ Home 
There is no proper physical entity of home in the footpath of Green Road. Some basic physical 
                                                        
3 Total pavement dwellers in Green Road area is 648 comprising adult male 125, adult female 247, child 
male 140 and child female 136 (information collected personally from ‘Partner Agencies Liaison Officer’ 
Mr. Suvashish Karmakar , Concern Worldwide, Bangladesh  from “Amrao Manush” project dealing with 
pavement dwellers of Dhaka city). 
1007 
 
characteristics of a home denoted by Despres (1991): concrete structure, ownership, permanence 
are absent in the pavement. Yet the street sleepers are living here, considering it as their home.  
 
Figure 2. Street Sleepers 
just wake up in early 
morning inside their home 
in Green Road 
Figure 3. A family is getting 
ready for the day in early 
morning beside their home in 
Green Road 
Figure 4. Street Sleepers 
are sleeping at midnight 
inside their home in Green 
Road 
    
The built environment, meaning the footpaths that are elevated from the road level and 
sometimes partially covered by extended upper storey, is the stage where the makeshift home is 
built by the street sleepers. Nevertheless they have some belongings that make it possible for 
them to survive in the pavement/ footpath and perform the household activities with unique 
adaptations. Here is a gross listing of all belongings that constitutes the alternative home for the 
street sleepers: some beddings like a blanket or quilt, a pillow, sleeping mat, mosquito net, piece 
of polythene plastic sheet of around 183cmx305cm (6’x10’) size, pieces of ropes, bricks, wooden 
sticks, cooking utensils-a kerosene stove, a cooking pot, 1 glass, few plastic water bottle, blade, 
cutting knife, polythene packets for stored food, small boxes for spices and betel leaf, toiletries 
like soap, toothpowder, toothbrush, coconut oil, few sets of cloth, a pair of sandals. The quantity 
and extent of these elements changes according to user, affordability and availability. Importantly 
all these belongings have to be manageable within two or three carrying bags, because a quick 
and efficient mobility is inherent in the usage pattern of every day making and removing of the 
shelter. This special home of the street sleepers takes its physical form every day only in the night 
time. Only very private acts like sleeping and sex is done in this shelter, they also enjoy a late 
night meal with the family inside this home. Usually it is a tent type structure (figure 1, 3), more 
or less within 152cmx249cm (5’ x 8’) in dimensions accommodating 2-4 persons. The built form 
has a pattern developed out of minimum basic necessity, daily practice and using of common 
materials. Construction materials of this shelter are large piece of plastic sheet wrapped over a 
mosquito net which is tied with the shop front gates and other end is inclined and tied with bricks, 
the higher side is the head side, scrapped building materials like bricks, pieces of ropes, papers 
are used to strengthen the structure against wind and rain. This common shaped home changes in 
sizes depending on the places and number of people sleeps inside it. To sleep in this shelter, some 
street sleepers do not feel secured and are afraid of street hoodlums and addicted people while 
others seems rather comfortable. Sufia Begum (35), a female street sleeper is uncomfortable every 
night and sleeps with fear. On the other hand Ambia (32), Firoza Begum (60), Shahida (16), 
Shima (28), expressed similar feelings. 
 
 “I have no fear at night while sleeping”. Shima (28) said, “Whenever I make my children sleep 
inside my paper home, I pray to God to protect them; I don’t have fear, God will protect us.”  
1008 
 
 
   
Whatever the feeling of security is nobody wants to change her/his sleeping place unless there is 
opportunity for better place. They feel it comfortable to be at their chosen places each night. They 
have expressed that they cannot sleep if their place is changed. All other household activities are 
performed in the surroundings, from pavement to PDC (Pavement dwelling centre4) to other 
people’s house and any space available, accessible and usable to them. For cooking they 
sometimes make a temporary burner with some half bricks laid in a triangular shape leaving a 
space for wooden sticks, papers to burn inside and put their pot over it, some of them own 
kerosene stoves, some have the opportunity to cook in the house they work as maids, and now a 
days use the PDC cooking facility. Cutting, washing and preparing of the food is done in the open 
pavement. And dining is also done on there. For bathing the women require privacy more than 
men and try to get enclosed bathroom facility which is provided these days in the PDC, but prior 
to this establishment they would try to use nearby slums common toilets but that is subjected to 
availability and access, some other times they also use the nearby lake for bathing and washing 
clothes. Men usually wash in the lake. For sanitation they use the darkness of the night and early 
morning and use any leftover, unused or less frequently used space without any proper means of 
toilet.  
 
Figure 5. An old couple is 
packing their makeshift 
home in morning in Green 
Road 
Figure 6. Morning scenario 
just after unfolding street 
sleepers’ home in Green 
Road 
Figure 7. Morning 
freshening activities of 
street sleepers adjacent 
their home in Green Road 
    
Street sleepers’ household activities are performed broadly in two places; the sleeping and private 
part in the shelter itself and all others outside it. The social networking that entirely takes place in 
the outside arena is discussed here from a perspective regarding as the intangible aspect of home. 
Social activities of the street sleepers can be clearly divided in two parts, firstly as interactions 
within their internal community-with other street sleepers and secondly as all other social 
contacts and relations with people of the surrounding neighborhood. These social interactions are 
identified here regarding as inherent constructive component of a home.The interaction within 
community majorly rotates around their mutual transaction of livelihood assets, information, 
money and mostly daily life chitchats. In the footpath dwelling life, sharing of space and assets 
are more common because of less availability and also because it provides security, as a result 
they are usually found in small groups in times of eating, or going to bath or cooking. Apart from 
                                                        
4 A PDC is established in Green Road by NGOs, for the pavement dwellers with the facilities of 
sanitation, bathing, washing cloths, cooking, resting, day-care for children, medical treatment and 
savings. It opens at 9 in the morning till 5 in the afternoon 
1009 
 
these basic activities women also flock together during leisure time just to groom each other’s 
hair and gossip, while men get along each other gossiping, smoking, sleeping, sometimes playing 
board games or just resting together. While the children play along the sides of the footpath. All 
of these activities essentially take place in the pavement area, in comparison to a common rural 
life which is similar to some extent in the pattern of rural outdoor life.The second part of 
socialization is with people surrounding them but who are not street sleepers. For every aspect of 
their urban life street sleepers have to rely on this particular social interaction. Their survival and 
livelihood depends and based on this part of their social life. Their main motive of this interaction 
is to gain or improve livelihood assets, like- to obtain permission to use the shop front space and 
more importantly to get employed. Living in the same place for a long time make the street 
sleepers known to the local people, this helps the them largely to gain reliability and trust of the 
surrounding society. Upon this trust and reliability they get chances of employment. 
7. Analysis 
From the qualitative evidence in Colombia, Kellett and Moore (2003) suggest that the owning 
some tangible structure called home, no matter how poorly constructed it may be, is very 
important for a household’s security, freedom, autonomy, well-being and opportunity. Street 
Sleepers of Green road are in an extremer condition than this; their home is not of any concrete 
reality and is permanent only for a night. Yet they boldly and comfortably consider, refer and use 
this structure and discussed areas as their home. 
 
“……This is my home…”- Firoza Begum (60), a female street sleeper.  
 
   By going through relative literatures of home this is clear that by no means of definition this 
temporary structure can be considered as a home. Most basic tangible aspects of home like – 
permanence & continuity, centre for family relationship, security & control, retreat from 
surrounding world, concrete structure, ownership are absent  but again present in a limited , 
deformed and adapted mood. But the reality of using it as a dwelling place for more than decades 
by a large number of peoples certainly demands recognition of that structure as home. It is 
inappropriate by all means of characteristics required by a home still these street sleepers are 
using it as a home.  
   In the street reality there are always more vulnerable people who do not posses belongings 
and float around and simply lie on bare footpath, comparing to their context this shelter is used 
for decades- so very permanent & Continuous, protect from nature -so comfortable, controlled, 
separates form outside- so safe and secured and personal.  So in this severe vulnerable context 
this sanctuary is a successful living place “a home”. It is a home for the and by the street sleepers.   
Successes of this shelter as a home largely depend on other external context rather than its 
physical qualities or inadequacies. The street sleepers’ mental frameset of universal acceptance of 
situation and coping to it, along with accessibility and availability of a favorable external 
community makes it feasible for the street sleepers to use this shelter as a home for a long period 
of time. From literature review a key set of intangible aspects of home can be presented like – a 
centre for family relationships, a centre of activity, an emotional attachment to a place, a 
psychological and social construction and also the previously discussed sense of safety , security, 
comfort, control and ownership. These intangible aspects of home are a product of socio-cultural 
components in combination (Rapoport 1969, P. 48).All these socio-cultural activities of the street 
sleepers are performed in the open footpath area without much exception. Their employment and 
financial engagements also occurs in the open footpaths of the Green road .They meet peoples in 
the footpath, they treat their guests there, their children grow up here with other street children, 
they gossip, play & relax in the footpath, they greet each other in the pavement, they quarrel here, 
1010 
 
they get extorted here, they get involved in crime here. As a whole they laugh, cry and keep on 
living with a hope of a better future in these streets. No matter how small and insignificant their 
physical shelters are, those are the functional dwelling hubs of the street sleepers and are not only 
a night time shelter rather a permanent living place, where people continue to live on for a long 
period of time forming a sense of identity. Street sleepers live in severe vulnerability in all aspect 
of their life, their strange ability to sustain and progress in this context is a reality because of a 
social grouping formed by these people, who might not be able to live alone without the help and 
continuous protection of their internal & external social relationships.  
   An emotional attachment also gradually develops between these street sleepers and their 
specific places as is nicely expressed by the elderly female street sleeper Firoza Begum (60): 
 
“I have to sleep here in my place, I can’t sleep elsewhere; it’s like…….my room where I sleep, this 
is my home”.  
 
   This emotional attachment is found in Dovey’s (1985 cited in Tipple & Speak 2009, p.4) 
definition of home. “An emotionally based and meaningful relationship between dwellers and 
their dwelling places”. These socio-cultural components, physiological & psychological 
outcomes, social - communal life, these behavioral pattern all acting together in a complex way 
forms the “sense of home” and thus “sense of belonging”. 
8. Conclusion 
Street sleepers’ shelters are very temporary but they are consistent and used continuously for 
decades with regular modifications and adaptation which in terms gives them a feelings of 
permanence and continuity. This shelter gives them the feelings of identity.  Using it as a base 
they perform all livelihood activities in and around this. And feel an emotional attachment with 
their shelter. But rudimentary attributes of a home like the sense of security, safety and comfort 
are achieved simultaneously by the shelter and even more by their social life, their intimate 
mutual relationships. The strength of the construction of this small home is in its psychological 
and emotional components and it overcomes the shortcomings of its physical qualities, and hence 
provide the street sleeper a space to live, feel safe and comfortable, continue and aspire to carry 
on to a better future. 
   Street Sleepers’ shelter, surroundings and their social relations altogether enable them to 
perform their livelihood activities successfully, though within limitations. A combined effect of 
this living place and livelihood encircling it composes street sleepers’ sense of belonging. All 
aspects of the livelihood play role; the physical asset- shelter and the social asset – mutual 
relationships are the aspects that play direct role in composing the sense of belonging. Their 
inadequacies of tangible assets to construct a home are complemented by successful performance 
of their social relationships. 
 
References 
 
Suh, K.-D., Choi, B.H. and Yoon, S.B. (2005). Notes for the preparation of full papers. Proc. 3rd 
Int. Conf. on Asian and Pacific Coasts, Jeju, Korea, pp. 1-3. 
Alam, S. M. N. & Rahman, S. (2009), “A report on the baseline study for Amrao   Manush 
project”, Concern Worldwide  Bangladesh, Dhaka. 
Bachelard, G. (1997). “The Poetics of Space” in: Leach, N. (Ed), Rethinking Architecture, 
London: Routledge, pp-86-97. 
1011 
 
BBS (1999), Census of Slum Areas and Floating Population 1997, Bangladesh Bureau of 
Statistics, Dhaka. 
 
BBS (2003), Population Census, National Report July 2003, Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics, 
Dhaka. 
 
Begum, A. (1997), The Socio-economic Conditions of the Pavement Dwellers of Dhaka City 
(Research Report No. 150), Bangladesh Institute of Development Studies, Dhaka. 
 
Despres, C. (1991). Form, experience and the meaning of home in shared housing (unpublished 
PhD thesis), Milwaukee, Department of Architecture, University of Wisconsin. 
 
Dovey, K. (1985). “Home and homelessness”, in: I. Altman and C. Werner (Ed), Home 
Environments, Plenum Press, New York. 
 
Ghafur, S. (2004). ‘Home for the Development: Policy Implications for Homelessness in 
Bangladesh’, International Development Planning Review (formerly Thirld World Planning  
review). Vol.26, no.3, pp. 231-256. 
Hayward, D.G. (1976). ‘Dimensions of Home’ in S. Weidemann & J.R. Anderson (Ed), Priorities 
for Environmental Design Research, EDRA ,Washington DC. 
 
Kellett, P & Moore, J. (2003)., ‘Routes to home: homelessness and home-making in contrasting 
societies’, Habitat International, vol. 27, pp. 123-141. 
 
Lawrence, R. J. (1987). Housing, Dwelling and Homes: Design Theory, Research and Practice, 
Johm Wley, Chichester. 
 
Leach, N. (2006). Camoufladge, the MIT press, London 
 
Perry, H., Nurani, S., Quiyum, A. et al. (2007), Barrier to immunization among women and 
children living in slums of Zone 3 of Dhaka city, Bangladesh, Centre for Health and 
Population Research, ICDDR,B Working Paper no. 166, ICDDR,B, Dhaka. 
 
Rapoport, A. (1969). House form and culture, Foundations of cultural geography series, 
Prentice-Hall, Inc., N.J. 
 
Rapoport, A. (1995) “A critical look at the Concept Home”, in: Benjamin, D. N. (Ed), The home; 
words, Interpretations, Meanings and Environments, Avebury, England, pp. 25-52. 
 
Siddique, et al. (1986). Floating People of Dhaka City, Working paper no.3., Socio-economic 
Profile of Dhaka City Project, National Institute of Local Government, Dhaka.  
 
Somerville, P. (1992) “Homelessness and the meaning of home: Rooflessness or rootlessness?”, 
International Journal of Urban and Regional Research, vol. 16, no.4, pp. 529-539. 
 
Tipple, A. Graham & Speak, S. (2009). Hidden Millions: Homelessness in Developing Countries, 
Taylor & Francis Routledge, New York. 
1012 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
STUDY ON THE PERFORMANCE OF EXISTING POND SAND FILTERS IN 
PAIKGACHHA UPAZILA, KHULNA. 
 
 
Md. Selim Reza1, Prof. Dr. Md. Saiful Islam1, Md. Fazlul Haque1, Kumar Fagun Mallick1 and Jewel 
and Kumar Golder1 
 
 
ABSTRACT: Pond Sand Filter (PSF), a simple alternative option has been used mainly in the 
southern fringes of Khulna, Bagerhat, Satkhira, Jhalokathi, Noakhali, Perojpur and Barguna districts 
to treat the water from rain-fed ponds where ground water is mostly saline and suitable freshwater 
aquifers are not available. However, recent reports {DPHE-Danida, 2000) have been shown that the 
performance of the existing PSFs are not satisfactory. Out of 6 (six) PSFs in Paikgachha Upazila, 
Khulna 4 (four) of them are working. In this study the declining performance of the existing PSFs 
in Paikgachha Upazila were investigated. The major problems of the existing PSFs were observed 
like slow production, poor performance in removing fecal coliform, shorter filter run and operation & 
maintenance. This study also reveals that lack of awareness and reluctance among the beneficiaries. 
A survey was carried out among the beneficiaries about their opinion towards the existing PSFs 
and their participation in operation & maintenance. After critical examination of the technical, 
social and water quality issues of the existing PSFs, some conclusions and recommendations are 
made. Some important parameters like total coliform, fecal coliform, turbidity, salinity, pH, color, 
TS, TDS and SS were tested in KUET Environmental Engineering Laboratory for the raw water 
and for the various steps of treatment in order to determine the effectiveness of the treatment 
units of the community PSFs. Close observations were done to assess the removal of turbidity in 
the roughing/pre-filtration chamber to ensure trouble free operation of main filter bed. Removal 
of bacteria or Fecal coliform and time interval of washing the filter bed were also analyzed with 
observational and experimental basis. 
Keywords: Existing Pond sand filters (PSF), Performance, Survey, Total Coliform, Fecal coliform. 
1.  Introduction 
 
There are certain areas in the coastal belt of Bangladesh where tube wells are not successful, 
because ground water is mostly saline to depths of 700-1000 ft. (DPHE-Unicef, 1989) and suitable 
                                                             
1 Khulna University of Engineering & Technology, Khulna-9203, Bangladesh 
1013 
 
freshwater aquifers are not available. In addition to this, arsenic contamination of ground water in 
Bangladesh has been recognized as major problem from 1993. At least 59 districts of Bangladesh 
out of 64 have been reported exposed to arsenic problem (DPHE-WHO, 2000) Thousands of people 
have already been identified to be affected by arsenic poisoning, in addition to the millions 
potentially under threat from drinking contaminated water (Ahmed M. F. 2001). Provision of 
arsenic free water is urgently needed for immediate protection of health and well being of the 
people living in arsenic affected areas. However, in many situations, user perception and 
acceptability of existing arsenic removal technologies are not satisfactory. Substitution of tube well 
water by an alternative safe and reliable source of water supply is necessary for these areas. People 
in many places of southern fringes of Khulna, Noakhali, Bagerhat, Satkhira, Barguna, Perojpur, and 
Patuakhali districts, are mainly depend on pond water for drinking, cooking, washing, and bathing. 
These ponds are replenished by rainwater during monsoon and are not protected from surface water 
contamination. It contains high turbidity and bacteriological concentration. Use of such 
contaminated water is the cause of various diseases like diarrhea, dysentery, cholera among rural 
people, which results a chronic impact over rural health and economy of Bangladesh. Therefore, 
water from these ponds requires appropriate treatment prior to human consumption. As 
sophisticated treatment is neither practicable for small community water supply nor economically 
feasible, it is essential to develop a low cost technology for surface water treatment among these 
areas. Pond Sand Filters (PSFs) were first introduced by DPHE-Unicef jointly to overcome the 
problem since 1984 on a pilot basis. Pond Sand Filter is a small scale-filtering device having 
manually operated treatment units used to treat the adjacent pond water based on the principle of 
slow sand filtration. Brick chips     (Khoa) and sand chambers are arranged in series in the unit. In 
this system, pond water is discharged by hand pump in a small unit containing filter media and 
water is collected through taps. The initial design of PSF was developed under research & 
development activities and subsequently modifications were made. Later on, the construction of 
PSFs was undertaken in the development programs. According to DPHE-Danida (2000), about 477 
Pond Sand Filters were constructed under the above-mentioned Project in Pathorghata Upazila 
under Barguna district during 1989-1997. 
   Recent field reports (DPHE-Danida, 2000) revealed that the performances of the PSFs are not 
satisfactory. Out of 477 PSFs in Pathorghata Upazila, only 36 (i.e about 8%) are working and rest of 
them are non-functioning. It is also reported (WHO, 1998) that a number of PSFs are out of order 
due to various reasons. In Khulna Circle out of 76 PSFs, 47 (67.85%) are functioning, while in 
Barisal Circle out of 54 PSFs, 16 (29.6%), are functioning. The major problems of the existing PSFs 
were observed to be slow production, poor performance in removing fecal colifonn, shorter filter 
run and poor operation & maintenance. People are not interested in frequent washing of sand bed, 
necessary repair of plant, pumping sufficient water before collection of water from taps etc. 
Consequently the acceptance of PSF is gradually declining.  
   DPHE-Danida Water Supply and Sanitation Component has a scope to construct a number of                    
PSFs within its ongoing activities. The Central Co-ordination Unit (CCU) of DPHE-Danida Water 
Supply and Sanitation Component decided to investigate the existing PSFs before going for new 
1014 
 
construction. Accordingly, Project Management Unit (PMU), Patuakhali undertook a firsthand 
assessment on only 10 PSFs. 
The major recommendations of the brief assessment of Project Management Units are: 
• A detail study of the existing PSFs covering social as well as engineering 
aspects should be undertaken before repairing of existing PSFs or constructing 
new ones. 
• Technical   and   social   problems   including   operational   and   maintenance 
difficulties should be identified. 
Not only in Paikgachha but also in other areas like Satkhira, Bagerhat, Noakhali and other districts, 
PSFs are not functioning well. It is reported (Shakil et. al, 2000) that, out of 13 of PSFs in the study 
area at Shyamnager, Satkhira, only 5 are working. The major problems were found to be almost 
similar as that reported by DPHE-Danida (2000). Therefore, strategies for increasing social 
acceptance and modifications of design for better performance of PSFs are essential. An in-depth 
study is required to evaluate the performance of the PSFs as to why the problems are occurring 
particularly within a short span of time after the plants are commissioned. Review of selection of 
treatment processes, hydraulic design and operational arrangement is necessary to have clear 
understanding of the problems and to find out a solution for improvement of the performance. 
A sequence of different pre-filtration stages is frequently used as the most cost-effective option, 
applying the multi- barrier concept and hence, providing an efficient way of improving the 
microbiological water quality. It is reported (Wegelin, 1996) that roughing filters are able to 
separate particulate matter by 90% or more. It also improves the bacteriological water quality - a 1-
2-log reduction of fecal coliforms is often recorded. The roughing filters also contribute to reducing 
the color of dissolved organics and other substances in surface water. In combination with slow 
sand filters, roughing filters present a reliable and sustainable treatment process particularly for 
developing countries. Close involvement of future users in the planning phase, adequate treatment 
of plant operators and post project support to enhance a sustainable use of any type of water 
treatment process is, therefore, of a key importance. The main objectives of this study is to 
investigate the performance of existing PSFs and identify technical and social issues including 
operational and maintenance difficulties, to perform the questionnaire survey on Existing Pond Sand 
Filter and to assess the possible causes of malfunctioning of filter as well as abandoned the filter. 
This study has been conducted on 6 (six) PSFs where 4 (four) were functioning and 2 (two) were 
abandoned.  
 
2. Methodology 
 
To achieve the specific goal of this study an elaborate literature study on the related subject was 
carried out for the better understanding and representation of the problem. To identify the technical 
and social problems of existing PSFs a detail field investigation of 6 (six) PSFs were carried out 
where 4 (four) were functioning and 2 (two) were abandoned. Raw water and treated water samples 
1015 
 
were collected from functioning PSFs that were tested in KUET laboratory for water quality 
investigation and to assess the selection of unit process. A survey was carried out among the 
beneficiaries about their opinion towards the PSFs and their participation in the operation & 
maintenance. After critical examination of the technical, social and water quality issues of the 
existing PSFs, conclusion and recommendation was developed to increase the performance of PSFs 
under Paikgachha Upazila, Khulna. Important parameters like total coliform, fecal coliform, 
turbidity, salinity, pH, TS, TDS, SS, alkalinity & color were tested for the raw water and for the 
various steps of treatment in order to determine the effectiveness of various units of the PSF. Close 
observations were done to assess the removal of turbidity in the roughing/pre-filtration chamber to 
ensure trouble free operation of main filter bed. Removal of bacteria or Fecal coliform with respect 
to filter bed depth and filter media size, time interval of washing the filter bed were also analyzed 
with observational and experimental basis. From the experimental data and survey, assessed the 
possibility of filter malfunctioning and also the cause of filter abandon.  
 
3. Results and Discussions 
4.  
The raw water samples were collected from attached pond and filtered water samples were collected 
from outlet taps of functioning PSFs.  
 
  
Figure 1: Bar chart for Total Coliform 
Reduction of Abdur Rashid PSF 
 
Figure 2: Bar chart for Faecal Coliform 
Reduction of Abdur Rashid PS 
 
The turbidity of the samples were analyzed by turbid meter and total and fecal coliform tests were 
carried out by coliform membrane procedure in KUET,) Environmental laboratory. Bacteriological 
1016 
 
water quality is of major concern for surface water treatment. Drinking water should not contain any 
pathogenic organisms, which are often difficult to detect analytically. 
Table -1: Laboratory test result of TC and FC reduction of Existing PSFs 
 
It has also been shown that the total coliform reduction rate is lower for the case of higher content 
of water which may cause either clogging of the filter or lower growth of bacteria in the filter 
media. Water quality parameters of the existing functioning PSFs including pH, salinity, alkalinity, 
and hardness, TS, TDS and SS were also measured. The samples were collected from pond and 
outlet points after filtration. 
Out of 6 PSFs surveyed, only 4 were found to be functioning although with poor performance. Only 
2 CTFs were found to be trained, 6 were found with tool sets ml only 1 CTFs knew the operation 
and maintenance job. Users participation in operation and maintenance were found in only 2 sites 
and only 2 CTFs were found who had attempted to take advice from DPHE or others but without 
sufficient response. Two labors are sufficient for washing of the top layer of the sand bed. But users 
participation in operation and maintenance were not found in sites, where beneficiaries are not 
attended in O&M works by themselves or by cost sharing. The operation and maintenance cost for 
most of the PSFs are carried by the caretakers only. Out of 6 PSFs surveyed, 2 PSFs were found to 
Total Coliform/100 ml Faecal Coliform/100 ml Location of 
PSF 
Sample 
Collection RW TW % reduction  RW TW % reduction  
1st time 1960 220 88.80 1480 50 96.60 
2nd time 1405 155 89.00 345 26 92.50 
Abdur Rashid 
Soladana,    
Paikgachha 3rd time 160 0 100.00 30 0 100.00 
1st time 1520 350 77.00 1160 160 86.20 
2nd time 680 56 92.00 195 8 95.90 
Md.Shah 
Alam 
Soladana,    
Paikgachha 3rd time 100 0 100.00 70 0 100.00 
1st time 1920 170 91.00 1040 10 99.00 
2nd time 860 105 87.80 165 45 72.73 
Gaji Mijanur 
Rahman 
Paikgachha 
Porosova 3rd time 130 17 86.90 70 4 93.30 
1st time 1540 350 77.30 1140 250 78.00 
2nd time 938 100 89.30 415 35 91.50 
Upazila 
Parishod 
Paikgachha 
Porosova 3rd time 150 0 100.00 90 0 100.00 
1017 
 
be cleaned at an interval of around two weeks,  1 of one month, 1 one to two months, 2 were 
abandoned and a total of 2 CTFs were found who had not taken any attempt to clean out the dirty 
skin of the filter bed at all. Users are not interested for frequent washing of top layer of the sand 
bed. It has been found to have lack of technical knowledge in CTFs and the users about O & M. 
Most of the caretakers opined that they drew out the whole filter material at the time, of cleaning of 
filter bed instead of scraping top layer. Hence, lack of appropriate training and distribution of 
maintenance tools among the CTFs add to the problems of O&M. Out of 6 CTFs only 2 were 
familiar with the tasks of O & M. Plate 3.6 stows the functioning PSF at Paikgachha Porosova under 
Khulna District. Lack of awareness is the main constraint for O & M. It was found that the CTFs 
and users have lack of technical knowledge about filtration mechanism. Lack of appropriate training 
and distribution of maintenance tools among the CTFs were also responsible for poor 0 & M. Out of 
6 sites surveyed, 4 CTFs were found to have training from relevant authorities, 6 were found with 
tool sets. User participation in O & M was not found in sites.  
 
3.1  Findings of the field investigation 
 
On the basis of data obtained from detailed   field survey, the following major observations can be 
drawn. 
 The pre-filter chamber is very small in size (0.75mX0.45mX0.23m). It is not adequate to 
reduce turbidity of raw water for trouble free operation of filter chamber. 
 The depth of the sand bed is grossly inadequate compared to the WHO standard 
which is not sufficient for complete removal of bacteria. 
 The filter sand was found to be coarse sylhet sand. The quality of sand appeared to be 
satisfactory but not available locally. 
 The caretaker families and the users lack technical knowledge and are completely unaware 
of the filtration mechanism and O & M requirements. 
 Considerable amount of algae (medium to high) growth has been found in some of the 
ponds (37%) that may cause rapid blocking of the filter. 
 Most of the vertical PVC pipes were broken. These outlet structures are not 
sufficiently strong to ensure prevention of negative pressure on filter bed. 
 Provision of sun light the filter chamber was not found which is very essential 
for bacterial growth on the filter bed and subsequent removal of bacteria. 
 No provision was made to control the water head above the filter bed.  
1018 
 
 The embankments around the ponds are not well protected. Many ponds have high to 
medium turbid water and thus require provisions for pretreatment in addition to what can 
be achieved through PSFs. 
 Involvement of the user group for regular monitoring, maintenance, and repair is 
absent. Only the caretaker family is responsible for all these works. 
 Users are not sufficiently aware of O&M of the PSFs. They are not interested for frequent 
washing the filter bed. 
 People are not sufficiently aware of the ill effect of excessive nutrient inflow into the ponds. 
3.2  Actions Required for Improvement 
The reasons for non-functioning of the PSFs are almost similar. The same design has been used all 
over. In the light of detailed field survey, some important actions required for performance 
improvement are listed as below. 
 Modification of PSF design for better performance is essential. 
 To increase the filter run with trouble free operation the raw water turbidity must be 
reduced. Coarse media Filtration through gravel bed before sand filtration 
could reduce the load on the Filter bed. In this case horizontal flow roughing filter 
followed by vertical lip-flow roughing filter may be provided prior to filter 
chamber. 
 The depth of sand bed should be increased according to requirement for complete 
removal of bacteria. It is revealed from the filtration theory that the full bacterial 
activity extends to a depth of about 0.6m of the bed. The effective bed thickness 
should be ensured following WHO standard. 
 The effective grain size and uniformity co-efficient of filter sand should be 
checked. According to the filtration theory the range of" effective grain size and 
uniformity   co-efficient    should    be    between    0.15-0.35    mm    and    2.0-3.0 
respectively. 
 The depth of supernatant water should be increased to ensure sufficient head to 
pass water through the filter bed and sufficient detention time for various physical 
and bacteriological processes. 
1019 
 
 Provision of sunlight in the filter chamber should be provided for sufficient 
bacterial growth on the filter bed. Fiberglass may be used in the roof cover for 
this purpose. 
 Air bubbles would form and accumulate on the filter bed increasing the resistance 
against the filtration flow and consequently negative pressure may occur. Air 
bubbles of large size may even break up the filter bed and create fissures through 
which the water would pass without adequate purification. The outlet structure 
should be made sufficiently strong to ensure prevention of negative pressure on 
filter bed. In this case the vertical PVC pipe without any locking arrangement may not be 
sufficiently strong, and alternative options such as an overflow weir or vertical GI pipe 
locked with side wall may be provided in the effluent line. 
 
The following points should be considered in the selection of ponds for PSFs: 
 Pond should be large enough to ensure sufficient quantity of water in the dry season. 
 Salinity of pond water throughout the year should not exceed 600mg/L of chloride. 
 Iron content of the pond water throughout the year should not exceed 5.00 mg/L.  
Since the quality of raw water will affect the maintenance frequency of PSFs and the quality of 
filtered water, following points may be considered for pond development:  
 Small embankment should be provided to ensure sufficient protection from surface run-off 
entering into the pond. This will reduce the nutrient inflow and silting in the pond, so 
bacteria and raw water turbidity will be reduced. 
 The algae growth can be controlled by reducing nutrient inflow and photosynthetic activity. 
Following points may be considered for active community involvement: 
 Motivation campaign for using safe water must be ensured within the community through 
awareness raising programs, group meetings, leaflets, and other means. 
 User group may be formed among the beneficiaries for regular monitoring and maintenance 
work. 
1020 
 
 Users must understand fully the works involved in construction and operation of the PSF. 
Both the benefits and limitations must be made clear to them, so that the community can do 
the construction work and maintenance with proper training by skilled personnel.  
 Users limit be made ready to take full responsibility for cleaning, maintenance and repair of 
PSF at regular/need basis. 
 Appropriate caretakers training should be ensured.  
 No culture fishing, bathing and washing should be allowed in the pond.  
 Hygiene promotion is essential. Promotional activities such as boiling of drinking water in 
the event of non-functional PSFs, restriction of use of pond for any other purposes, 
replacing   hanging   latrines   near   ponds   by   sanitary   latrines   in   the household, 
fencing the pond in order to prohibit public access to the pond should be ensured. 
4. Conclusion 
The following conclusions are drawn on the basis of results obtained from the performance study of 
the existing and modified PSF. 
4.1  Technical Aspects 
1. Vertical down-flow roughing filter is not satisfactory an effective method for the pre-treatment of 
moderately turbid and bacteriological contaminated surface water. It can reduce about 82 % of 
turbidity and about 95.6 % of total coliform and 86.2 % of fecal coliform with negligible head loss. 
2. It can reduce 90.9 % of turbidity and around 100% fecal coliform. 
3. The filter run of the existing PSFs is 15 to 30 days. 
4. The color removal efficiency of the existing PSFs is 79.5% which is acceptable quality of water. 
5. The yield capacity of the existing PSF is not satisfactory. 
6. Roughing filters are able to reduce turbidity to a level that allows a sound and efficient SSF 
operation. 
7. The increased sand bed depth (30 inch) in the existing PSF has allowed the full bacterial activity 
in the filter bed and produces the acceptable quality of water. 
8. The outlet structure of the modified PSF is strong enough to ensure the prevention of 
development of negative pressure in the filter bed. 
1021 
 
9. Detailed and careful investigation of raw water quality should be carried out in order to select 
appropriate unit processes.  
Acknowledgement 
The author expresses his praise to Almighty Allah, who helped to complete the term paper 
successfully and highly grateful to Mr. Shorforhaj Khan and other colleagues of DPHE-
Paikgachha Upazila for their sincere cooperation and providing valuable information. The authors 
also acknowledge the help of Mr. Sarder Shahidul Alam, laboratory assistant & Sayed Ahsan Ali, 
Technician of Environmental engineering laboratory of the   Department of Civil Engineering, 
KUET, Khulna for their continuous help. 
References 
Ahmed, M.F & Rahman, M.M (2000), Water Supply and Sanitation; Rural and Low Income Urban 
Communities,  ITN-Bangladesh, BUET, Dhaka. 
Ahmed, M.F and Jahan H(2000), “Participatory Management of Low Cost Water Supply and 
Sanitation”, ITN-Bangladesh, BUET, Dhaka.  
American Water Works Association (1971), Water quality and treatment, 3rd edition, McGraw-Hill, 
Inc, New York, USA. 
 
 
1022 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
SUSTAINABILITY IN ARCHITECTURAL BUILT FORM OF SYLHET REGION IN          
CONTEXT OF CULTURAL ETHNICITY 
 
 
Rezwan Sobhan1 and Kawshik Saha2  
 
 
ABSTRACT: With growing interest in sustainable practices in architecture, different approaches 
to sustainability have emerged. Now we are witness of the early revolutionary stages that will 
shape the future of human habitat .Although the practice of sustainable architecture has largely 
been understood as an issue of technology and energy performance but now it is redefined as a 
part of regional cultural landscape. This study focus to find out the sustainable issues which has 
shaped the architecture of this region. The source of this sustainable building practice and their 
prospect. The out come of the research will definitely help future designers and researcher to 
have a conception on sustainable issues of architectural design that will influence them in future 
sustainable design process. This research can serve as an important projection for future 
designers of a contemporary society.  
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Throughout history architecture has played a crucial role in helping to define humanity’s relation 
to its larger surroundings. Architecture has not merely been a means for providing shelter, but has 
operated as a constructed model of a larger order, a vehicle embodying the temporal and 
cosmological understanding of the world in which we live. As such, architecture has the potential 
to bridge between the practical and the transcendent, playing both a practical and a symbolic role. 
In this sense architecture can play a pivotal role in the larger paradigmatic movement of 
sustainability.Sylhet, as a historic city that is more than thousand years old as a commercial hub, 
which explains its original namesake as ‘Sree Hotto’. The present area of the town is 46 sq-kms 
but the core and rapid growing part is still limited with in 10 sq-km and this part was the old town 
which experienced pre Mughal, Mughal and Colonial rule. The Sylhet can be considered as a 
museum of different architectural style including vernacular, colonial, modern, tribal and 
contemporary house forms. The objective of this research is to reveal the significant sustainable 
features which have been adopted through architect rural built form located in the Sylhet region. 
The study also aims to provide a possible outline for sustainable design can be adopted by 
contemporary designers.The out come of the research will definitely help future designers and 
researcher to have a conception on sustainable issues of architectural design that will influence 
them in future sustainable design process. This research can serve as an important projection for 
future designers of a contemporary society. 
                                                        
1Assistant Professor, Department of Architecture , SUST, Sylhet, Bangladesh. arc.sobhan@gmail.com 
2Lecturer, Department of Architecture , SUST, Sylhet, Bangladesh. kawshik.saha@gmail.com 
1023 
 
2. Methodology 
 
This study is comparative ‘case study’ based .Architectural projects with cultural significances 
were selected from different timeline. These selected projects include vernacular to neo modern, 
colonial to contemporary, rural to urban. Common issues of social and cultural sustainability 
which shaped the form were defined. Also, how regional microclimate influenced the local 
material culture and building technology. 
 
3. Issues of Architectural Sustainability: 
 
3.1 The Role of Culture in Defining Sustainability 
 
Without cultural awareness, any attempt to create a more sustainable environment is likely to 
falter as it encounters but fails to recognize very deeply structured personal responses to 
particular places .Guy and Farmer conclude that “Contemporary architecture should therefore 
seek a greater understanding of local culture if it is to be sustainable.” This view is further 
supported by the notion that to be truly sustainable, buildings need to remain relevant and 
functional to the community they serve over the long term. Energy efficient buildings that fail to 
address cultural needs and values may suffer premature obsolescence and invite major 
modification or outright demolition and replacement.  
 
Vale and Vale (1991: 116) have argued that “One way to achieve longevity and avoid demolition 
is to design buildings that are capable of adapting to the users’ changing needs.” McDonough and 
Braungart (2002) address the notion of being “native” to a place, implying the more holistic 
relationship to local context, and by extension to the larger ecosphere. 
 
3.2 Vernacular Sources 
 
Even from the narrow perspective of energy consumption, fundamental design strategies such as 
building orientation, location and nature of fenestration and viability of alternative energy sources 
(solar collection, wind generation, ground source heating) must all be closely attuned to local 
climatic, microclimatic and geological conditions if they are to perform effectively. At a more 
strategic level, procurement of locally available materials and regional construction practices 
taking advantage of local labor skills also constitute effective strategies for reducing the 
ecological footprint of construction projects. It is in Sylhet, where a tropic climate, geographic 
isolation of settlements and limited access to technology demanded the development of 
vernacular responses—in both indigenous and early settler architecture—very carefully attuned 
to local conditions. 
   
3.3 Critical Regionalism and Sustainable Architecture 
 
A critical re-reading of Frampton’s essay - “Culture Versus Nature: Topography, Context, Climate, 
Light and Tectonic Form”—raises the possibility of a discourse on sustainable design that reaches 
beyond its traditional energy-efficient confines. Many of the elements described by Frampton 
lend themselves to the pursuit of an architecture whose responsiveness to local conditions leads 
1024 
 
not only to greater energy and material efficiencies, but that also address local cultural mores and 
tectonic traditions, leading to not only greener but also more meaningful architecture.With this 
construct in mind, it is possible to begin to articulate a theoretical basis for sustainable 
architecture that brings the discourse outside of the simulation lab and into the mainstream of 
critical practice. This serves as a potentially important model for a contemporary architecture that 
adopts strategies of sustainability related to local climatic and geographic conditions, cultural 
practices and mores, but that also participates in a broader critical discourse by engaging 
sustainability not only as technique or method, but as a cultural paradigm. 
 
4. Interpreting Sustainability in Architectural built form  
 
In their article “interpreting Green Design: beyond performance and ideology”, Simon Guy and 
Graham Farmer (2001) argue that there are two general models of analyzing sustainable 
architecture: Most common method is to view the diversity of design strategies as “distracting” to 
the necessity of comparing measurable data on issues such as climate change. And the second 
approach, believes that the diversity of green architecture is due to the different ideologies and 
philosophical beliefs held by the actors 
involved. Here Guy and Farmer (2001) suggest a third model which “recognizes the 
interpretative flexibility of the sustainability concept” (p. 11). There are three main points 
in their discussions: 
 
1. There is gap between the definition of green buildings and the actual practice 
of sustainable architecture as a “complex and contextual social phenomena”. This 
approach is the pragmatic approach that Moore suggested in non modern regionalism 
and what Bruno Latour calls “science in practice”. 
 
2. They argue that these diverse strategies do not simply materialize from a pregiven 
definition of “greenness”. Instead, they are shaped through a combination of different 
philosophies of green design in a particular context.  
 
3 They also emphasize the need to understand contexts of sustainable architecture and 
link the various technological pathways to the local context, which is one of the main 
features of Non modern regionalism. 
 
5. Six logics of sustainable architecture 
 
Guy and Graham Farmer (2001) developed the three models of Performance based, Ideological 
based and Hybrid models further and proposed six “logics” of sustainable architecture used as a 
typology for analysis of environmental logics. 
 
Guy and Farmer point out in their proposal is that these logics may overlap and interact, and they 
are by no means “frozen in time or space”. Therefore the categories may merge, collide or even 
be absent in practice. Each of the logics present the ways in which the debate is shaped 
differently upon various interpretations of environmental problems.  
 
 
1025 
 
Table 1: six logics of vernacular architecture by Guy and Graham Farmer (2001) 
 
Logics Image of Space Idealized concept of space 
Eco technique 
global contest 
microphysical 
 
integration the  global environmental concerns into 
conventional building design 
urban vision of compact and dense city 
 
Eco centric 
fragile 
macrobiotic 
 
harmony with nature through decentralized 
autonomous 
Buildings with limited ecological foot prints. 
Ensuring the stability, integrity, and flourishing of 
local and global biodiversity 
 
Eco aesthetics Alienating Anthropocentric 
Universally reconstructed in the light of new 
Ecological knowledge and transforming our 
consciousness of nature. 
 
eco cultural Cultural context and regional 
learning to "shell" through building  adapted to 
local and bioregional physical and cultural 
characteristics 
 
Eco medical Polluted Hazardous 
A natural and tactile CM environment Which 
ensures the heath, well-being .end quality of life or 
individuals. 
 
Eco social social context hierarchical 
Reconciliation of individual and community in 
socially cohesive manner trough decentralized 
organic nonhierarchical and participatory 
communities 
 
 
 
6. Project Examples: case Study: 
 
6.1 House at Amberkhana, Sylhet city. 
 
This is a 120 year old residential house located near the amberkhana point in Sylhet city heart. 
Now the house is used as a official function as a rent basis. The house is an excellent example of 
local vernacular house form located in Sylhet city. This house contains a compact configuration 
of forms with pitch roof. Different modules and spaces are connected and had a compact looking 
form. The form is elongated east west and facing south. The entry approach is defined by a 
shaded semi outdoor space. The house includes a inner court yard for using it for household 
needs. a internal semi outdoor shaded circulation is connecting the different rooms the house. The 
most dominating part of this house form is connected pitched roof of different heights. Roofs 
1026 
 
manly oriented east west side are not dispersed but connected with each other to define various 
functions inside. The roofs are made from tin which indicate the ratio of heavy rain fall in this 
area. The external and internal walls of this house are made light weight. Each wall contains three 
feet high brick wall and bamboo maid cement plastered wall attached on it These walls helps to 
reduce building weight and climatically work as good insulator. The contraction technique was 
based on free fabricated assembling on site. The building needs regular maintenance and life 
cycle not too high. But all the building materials are rescale and environmental friendly.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig 1 & 2: Vernacular House located in sylhet city. 
 
6.2 The Sylhet Sadar Hospital, Sylhet city 
 
This is a 100 year old hospital building house located near the chauhatta point in Sylhet city heart. 
Now building is used as a dormitory of the medical college students. The house is an excellent 
example of British colonial architecture with local archetypes. The colonial style has been 
blended with native building features. This building complex is a rectangular shaped form with a 
large open space in heart. Four linear symmetrical built forms are connected in their corners to 
form the rectangular shape. The main entry in the complex faces the west side with typical 
symmetrical colonial approach. The building is single storied with pitched roof over it the roofs 
are made from tin which indicate the ratio of heavy rain fall in this area. The external and internal 
walls of this building are made of heavy thick brick wall. These walls carry the major structural 
load as well as act as a good thermal insulator. The major circulation way is a semi outdoor space  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig 3 & 4: Old hospital located in Sylhet city, Colonial style blended with rationality. 
1027 
 
which connects all the spaces, May be this semi shaded circulation way integrate all the four 
individual buildings. The contraction technique was based on typical masonry construction 
technique. Another major climatic feature introduced in this building is rain water harvesting. 
Rain water is collected and reused for cleaning purpose. 
 
6.3 A house of indigenous Khasi Community, Duncan Teas Estate, Sylhet 
 
Sylhet is a land of regional cultural variety of different ethnicity> not only for main stream 
Bengalis but Sylhet is a home for various indigenous or tribal communities. so architecture of this 
tribal communities is a great example of regional ethnicity as they are directly responsive with 
local microclimate and topography. This house is located in a Khasi Settlement of 100 year 
old .The settlement was spread on a hill top. The house on a stilt platform rested on bamboo poles. 
This is a key regional feature of hilly topography. The pitch roofed built form covers most of the 
wall surface for shading from sun and protect from rain. A major part of this form is the wide 
veranda or semi outdoor .this act as a entry approach and connect the home with the common 
circulation of village people. The walls are made from burned brick and the wooden made 
bamboo stick frame. Walls are plastered with mud or cement. These houses have very similar 
technique like the vernacular house form located in Sylhet city. All the house form has a back 
yard for house hold works. The space under the floor platform is often used as storage. This 
indigenous form ion only environmental responsive but also support the socio economic 
livelihood of this ethnic society. For them this is more than a house this is a symbol for cultural 
ethnicity contemporary architecture practice. This residence is a duplex including all the 
residential. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.4 The house of P S Chowdhury, Halderpara, Sylhet 
 
This is a residence designed by Architect Rajon Das. He is one of those one architects who are 
trying to re establish vernacular features and integrate these regional archetypes with facilities 
distributed in both floors. The structure is built in beam and column structure and both internal 
and external column are made of open face bricks without plaster. The low cost attitude and local 
Fig 5 & 6: A house of Indigenous Khasi Settlement in Double Chora,Sylhet 
1028 
 
microclimate inspired architect to use pitch roof as a major structural element. Exposed brick act 
as a good thermal insulator. Large opening for proper ventilation. Rainwater spout for rain water 
drainage. Large semi outdoor space directly inspired from traditional local vernacular 
architecture. Low cost technology and microclimate adopted by contemporary architect to create 
this architecture with regional identity. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig 7 & 8 : A contemporary house located in Syhet city designed by Ar.Rajon Das 
 
7. A Model for Sustainable Practice 
 
The examples cited above are chosen from four distinct cultural and geographic regions of Sylhet 
region, the teagarden area, the hilly indigenous settlement, the city center and suburban area. The 
climate, geography and cultural heritage of these locations differ widely, resulting in highly 
particularized architectures which, in varying ways, marry contemporary technological building 
practice with unique local conditions. These examples of different architecture speak with a 
polyphonic voice which is nuanced, layered and complex, reflecting Kohler’s statement (2003: 
85) that “There is no conflict between regionally appropriate and environmentally appropriate 
building practice” as well as Frampton’s call (1983: 21) for “a high level of critical self 
consciousness” 
in his proposal for Critical Regionalism. This study clearly shows that some typical sustainable 
features are carried out by all the buildings from different conditions and types. The case study 
shows the key regional issues which architecture must follow for its sustainability. This issues are 
more that the climatic or environmental but much more cultural. Practice of sustainability is a 
cultural practice here. The projects included in this study suggest an approach that may prove to 
be among the most effective strategies for advancing the cause of architecture that is sustainable 
at a number of levels, fulfilling its role not only as environmental mediator but also as a cultural 
project. 
 
References 
 
Chakasim, Kenneth J. Sustainability: The alternative Perspective, unpublished manuscript  
Prepared as part of course of study at Ryerson University’s Department of Architectural 
Science, 2004. Cole, Raymond J., LEED-Canada Guide for facilitating use of the 
LEED  Green Building Rating System, Draft, June 2003. 
1029 
 
Farmer G., & Guy S. (2002). Interpreting Green Design: Beyond performance and 
Ideology. Built Environment, Vol 28, No.1, 11-22. 
Frampton, Kenneth “Towards a Critical Regionalism: Six Points for an Architecture of 
Resistance”  
In H. Foster (ed.) The Anti-Aesthetic: Essays on Postmodern Culture, Port Townsend, 
Washington: Bay Press,1983, pp. 16-30. 
Frampton, Kenneth “Technoscience and Environmental Culture: A Provisional Critique” in 
Journal  
Of Architectural Education, February 2001, v. 54, n. 3, pp. 123-129. Cambridge, Mass.: 
MIT Press, 2001. 
Frye, Northrop "Conclusion to a Literary History of Canada." The Bush Garden: Essays on the  
Canadian Imagination. Toronto: Anansi, 1975 
Guy, Simon and Graham Farmer “Contested Constructions: The Competing Logics of Green  
Buildings and Ethics” in W. Fox, (ed.) Ethics and the Built Environment, London: 
Routledge, 2000, pp. 73-87. 
Mina,Kalkatechi ,(2009),Nonmodern Regionalism And Sustainability: 
The Case Of Two Contexts, A thesis submitted to the College of Architecture and 
Environmental Design of Kent State University in partial fulfillment of the 
requirements for the Degree of Master’s of Architecture, 
Macy, Christine “Appropriate Technology” in Canadian Architect, February 1998, v. 43, n. 2,  
Pp.16-19. Toronto: Southam Magazine Group, 1998. 
Kohler, Niklaus “Cultural Issues for a Sustainable Built Environment” in R. Cole and R. Loach  
Eds.) Buildings, Culture & Environment: Informing Local & Global Practices, Oxford: 
Blackwell, 2003, p. 85. 
Kumar, Satish et al., “Introducing comparative analysis to the LEED  system: A case for 
rational  
And regional application”, in Proceedings of the ACEEE 2002 Summer Study on Energy 
Efficiency in Buildings, American Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy, 2002. 
Raydan, D., Ratti, C., & Steemers, K. (2006). Courtyards: A bioclimatic form. In 
B. Edwards, P. Land & M. Hakmi (Eds.), Courtyard housing: Past, present and future 
(pp. 135-145). London: Taylor & Francis. 
1030 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
INTRODUCING A FRAME SHAPE TO IMPROVE BUILDING PERFORMANCE UNDER 
EARTHQUAKE EXCITATIONS 
 
 
S. M. Ashfaqul Hoq 1, Md Ahsan Sabbir2 and Kashif Mahmud 3 
 
 
ABSTRACT: The main objective of this study is to observe the effect of frame shape on the global 
behavior of rigid frame and introduce a frame shape which will improve building performance in 
earthquake excitations. The investigation started with proposing a rhombus shape frame. The 
proposed Rhombus Shape frame is created from the rectangular moment resisting frame with keeping 
the height-to-width ratio and the loading same. The performance of the proposed 9-story Rhombus 
Shape Frame is compared with the popular Rectangular Moment Resisting Frame for different 
earthquake records. For this study the seismic performance of the frame is evaluated based on the 
inter-story drift. This study report, that even with significant amount of member reduction, the 
proposed frame shape performs better with higher lateral stiffness than the equivalent rectangular 
moment resisting frame. 
 
 
1. Introduction 
  
Structural steel framing system evolved in an attempt to resist lateral forces. After 1906, it was 
highlighted that the buildings with steel frame performs better in earthquakes than the masonry 
structures (FEMA-355e). Prior to the San Francisco earthquake at this year there was no provision 
for earthquake in the building codes. After Santa Barbara earthquake in 1925, Uniform Building 
Code (UBC) was the first to include seismic provisions in 1927. In 1959 Structural Engineers 
Association of California (SEAOC) issued “lateral force recommendation” which was later adopted 
by the UBC in 1961. The key feature was the requirement of steel moment resisting frame for tall 
buildings over 160ft. American Institute of Steel Construction (AISC) includes seismic provisions in 
their 1992 specifications. With each major earthquake the building code is modified (FEMA-355e). 
                                                        
1Lecturer, Department of Civil Engineering, Stamford University Bangladesh, Dhaka, Bangladesh. 
hoq@stamforduniversity.edu.bd 
2Senior Lecturer, Department of Civil Engineering, Stamford University Bangladesh, Dhaka, Bangladesh. 
asabbir@stamforduniversity.edu.bd  
3Assistant Professor, Department of Civil & Environmental Engineering, Islamic University of Technology 
(IUT), Gazipur-1704, Bangladesh. rusho@iut-dhaka.edu 
1031 
 
At this point, it was believed that the steel moment resisting frames are adequate to dissipate 
earthquake energy with the presumed ductile behavior of its moment resisting connections. But, the 
Northridge earthquake in 1994 challenged this assumption when many beam-column connections 
failed in a brittle manner.The significant amount of monetary losses in the Northridge and Loma 
Prieta earthquakes triggered the popularity of the performance based seismic design. Vision 2000 
report by the SEAOC (1995) highlighted the fact of economic losses even in the moderate 
earthquakes. It was identified the need of a design and construction procedure which could control 
the damage to acceptable limits. These limits were same as those described in the FEMA-273 
developed by the Applied Technology Council (ATC). The four performance levels labeled as 
Operational, Immediate Occupancy, Life Safety and Collapse Prevention were the state of the 
defined and observable damage in the structure. Federal Emergency Management Agency published 
the FEMA-355F prepared by the SAC joint venture in September 2000, where it narrated 
performance prediction and evaluation technique for moment resisting frames along with the seismic 
hazard levels and analysis procedures. An important feature of this procedure was to state capacity 
and demand in terms of story drift. FEMA-356 tabulated some typical drift values to describe the 
overall structural response. Vision 2000 by the SEAOC imposed some drift limitations for steel 
moment frames. Also, the connection requirements according to the Seismic Provisions of AISC 
2005 requires that beam to column connections be able to carry minimum 0.04 radians of inter story 
drift angle. Connection detailing is out of the scope of this study. The purpose of this study is to focus 
on the control of damage by increasing the stiffness and thereby reducing the drift demand under 
earthquake excitations. For this reason, the present study proposes a new steel framing system which 
will control the drift values to the acceptable limits. To keep the inter story drifts within the specified 
limits, a rhombus shape is proposed as a seismic load resisting system. The idea behind this shape is 
to utilize the advantage of both the rectangular moment resisting frames and concentrically braced 
frames. 
 
 
1. Moment Resisting Frames 
 
Moment resisting frames are the rectangular assemblage of beams and columns. The beams are 
rigidly connected to the columns. Primarily the rigid frame action provides resistance to lateral forces 
which develops bending moments and shear forces in the frame members and joints. A moment 
frame cannot displace laterally without bending the beams and columns due to its rigid beam-column 
connections. The bending rigidity and strength of the frame members provide the lateral stiffness and 
strength for the entire structure. It is viewed as a highly ductile system among all the structural 
systems. Also, large force reduction factors are assigned to design earthquake forces in building 
codes. But, compared to other braced systems moment frames generally required larger member sizes 
than those required only for strength alone to keep the lateral deflection within code approved drift 
limits. Again, the inherent flexibility of the system may introduce drift-induced nonstructural damage 
under earthquake excitation than with other stiffer braced systems. Even these perceptions regarding 
the expected performance of steel moment frames in energy dissipation under lateral loads was 
1032 
 
sacrificed after the 1994 Northridge earthquake when the steel moment frames did not perform as 
expected. Brittle failures occurred at beam-column connections which challenge the assumption of 
high ductility of the system (Bruneau, M. et al., 1998). 
 
 
2. Concentrically Braced Frames 
 
Concentrically braced frame is an efficient frame system marked by its high elastic stiffness which is 
commonly used to resist wind or earthquake loadings. The system achieves high stiffness by its 
diagonal bracing members which resist lateral forces by using higher internal axial actions and 
relatively lower flexural actions. Diagonal bracings form the main units which provide lateral 
stiffness in a CBF system.  Braces can be in the form of I-shaped sections, circular or rectangular 
tubes, double angle attached together to form a T-shaped section, solid T-shaped sections, single 
angles, channels and tension only rods and angles. Bracing members are commonly connected with 
other members of the framing system by welded or bolted gusset plates. The CBF design method 
generally focuses on dissipating energy in the braces such that the connection is designed to remain 
elastic at all times. To maximize the energy dissipation, the brace connections should be designed to 
be stronger than the bracing members they connect so that the bracing member can yield and buckle 
(Bruneau, M. et al., 1998). CBF systems are considered to be less ductile seismic resistant structure 
as compared to other systems due to failure of the bracing members under large cyclic displacements. 
These structures can experience large story drift after buckling of bracing members, which in turn 
may lead to fracture of bracing members. 
 
 
3. Eccentrically Braced Frames 
 
The eccentrically braced frame is a combination of concentrically braced frame and moment resisting 
frame. The EBF combines individual advantages of each frame and minimizes their respective 
disadvantages. It possesses high elastic stiffness, stable inelastic response under cyclic lateral loading 
and excellent ductility and energy dissipation capacity (Bruneau, M. et al., 1998). Eccentric braced 
frames utilize both the axial loading of braces and flexure of beam sections to resist the lateral forces. 
It addresses the need for a laterally stiff framing system with large energy dissipation capabilities 
under large seismic forces. The key distinguishing feature of an EBF is the isolated segment of a 
beam termed as “link”. Its configuration is similar to other conventional braced frames with the 
exception that each brace must be eccentrically connected to the frame. Eccentric connection 
introduces shear and bending in the beam adjacent to brace. The short segment of the frame where 
those forces are concentrated is the “link.” All inelastic activity is intended to be confined to the 
properly detailed link. Links act as structural fuses which dissipate seismic input energy without 
much degradation of strength and stiffness and thereby transfer less force to the adjacent columns, 
beams and braces. 
 
1033 
 
 
4. Buildings by Sac Joint Venture 
  
The SAC joint venture between the Structural Engineers Association of California (SEAOC), the 
Applied Technology Council (ATC), and the California Universities for Research in Earthquake 
Engineering(CUREe), proposed 3-story, 9-story and 20-story frames. SAC joint venture also 
commissioned three consulting firms to model these three model buildings following the local code 
requirements of the following three cities: Los Angeles (ICBO 1994), Seattle (ICBO1994) and Boston 
(BOCA 1993) (Gupta, A. and Krawinkler, H., 1999). This study considered the geometric dimensions 
of the 9-story SAC building to model the base rectangular shape moment resisting frame. Structural 
design is out of the scope of this study. Figure 1 illustrates the lateral force resisting frame for the 9-
story SAC building. 
 
 
 
Figure 1 Elevation for 9-story SAC building 
 
5. Rhombus Shape Frame 
 
The Rhombus shape has been constructed by placing the Rhombus inside the Rectangular frame. This 
Rhombus shape frame has the same height and width ratios as the Rectangular shape. All the member 
sizes and masses were kept the same for both the shapes. Then the pure rhombus shape is generated 
by removing all the members outside of it, which makes 40~45% reduction in member than the 
common rectangular moment resisting frame. Figure 2 illustrates the proposed frame generated from 
the frame in Figure 1. The idea behind the proposed frame is to incorporate the advantages of both the 
rectangular moment resisting frames and concentrically braced frames. The first type of framing 
system uses the flexural stiffness of the members to gain lateral stiffness; while in the later type, 
internal axial stiffness of the diagonals are the main sources for lateral stiffness. The dissipative 
capacity of the beam ends allow ductility and the stiffness provided by the diagonals limit inter story 
drift. This proposed frame is expected to behave structurally like a vertical truss, where the diagonal 
components form a vertical cantilever truss to withstand horizontal loading. Due to the moment 
1034 
 
resisting connections, flexural rigidity of the members will provide lateral stiffness to the system. But 
it was expected that the axial stiffness of the diagonal members will form the main units to resist 
lateral loading.  
 
 
Figure 2: Proposed Frame Shape
 
 
6. Numerical Modeling of the Frame 
 
As a lateral load resisting system the performance of the proposed frame shape is compared with the 
equivalent rectangular shape frame. Lateral load resisting systems, located at the perimeter of the 9-story 
SAC building along with its equivalent rhombus shape frame is modeled for numerical analysis. All the 
two dimensional frames are modeled in Opensees software. All the support conditions are assumed to be 
fixed. The beam-to-column connections are considered to be rigid. All the beam and column member 
sizes are selected as W14X283. The frames are given half of the total seismic mass of the buildings at 
each floor level. Mass on each floor level is concentrated in the beam-to-column joints as nodal mass. The 
mass properties on different floor levels are as shown in Table 1. 
 
Table 1 Mass values at different floor levels for SAC buildings. (Gupta, A. and Krawinkler, H., 1999) 
 
9-story Structures 
Floor Level 
Total Mass at Floor Level 
(kips-sec2/ft) 
Roof 73.10 
Floor 9 to Floor 3 67.86 
Floor 2 69.04 
 
1035 
 
 
7. Ground Acceleration 
 
Ground acceleration values in an earthquake vary with time in an irregular manner. So, seismic demands
are evaluated based on the time history analysis. As part of the SAC steel research project, sets of ground 
motions which are representative of different hazard levels have been assembled for three different 
geographic locations. Each set consist of ground motions with a probability of exceedence of 2% (referred 
to as the 2/50 sets, with a returning period of 2475 years) and 10% (referred to as the 10/50 sets, with a 
returning period of 475 years) in 50 years (Somerville, P. et al., 1997). Each set consist of 20 time 
histories for 10 ground motions. 
   For this study, frames are analyzed under 8 earthquake records, 4 of these records are from the 2/50 sets 
and rest of the 4 are from the 10/50 sets. These records are generated for the Los Angeles site. All the 
records are taken from SAC earthquake database. The information for the selected earthquakes is 
tabulated in Table 2.  
 
Table 2 Details of Los Angeles ground motions selected for this study. (FEMA-355C) 
 
SAC 
Name 
Record Earthquake 
Magnitude 
Probability of 
Exceedence 
Scale 
Factor 
DT 
(sec) 
Duration 
(sec) 
PGA 
(cm/sec2) 
LA01 El Centro, 
1940 
6.9 10% 2.01 0.02 39.38 452.03 
LA02 El Centro, 
1940 
6.9 10% 2.01 0.02 39.38 662.88 
LA11 Loma Prieta, 
1989 
7 10% 1.79 0.02 39.38 652.49 
LA12 Loma Prieta, 
1989 
7 10% 1.79 0.02 39.38 950.93 
LA21 Kobe, 1995 6.9 2% 1.15 0.02 59.98 1258.00 
LA22 Kobe, 1995 6.9 2% 1.15 0.02 59.98 902.75 
LA27 Northridge, 
1994 
6.7 2% 1.61 0.02 59.98 908.70 
LA28 Northridge, 
1994 
6.7 2% 1.61 0.02 59.98 1304.10 
 
 
8. Results from the Numerical Analysis 
  
To observe the seismic performance of the proposed frame shape, it is subjected to time-history analysis 
and compared with the popular rectangular shape moment resisting frame. It is found that the natural time 
period of vibration for the proposed frame is less than the rectangular frame. The natural time period and 
frequency for the first five mode shapes of the moment frame of SAC building and proposed frame is 
tabulated in Table 3. 
1036 
 
 
Table 3 Modal time period and frequencies for 9-story frame 
 
 
9-Story Frame 
 
SAC Proposed Rhombus Shape 
Period Frequency Period Frequency 
 
Mode 
(sec) (Hz) (sec) (Hz) 
1 2.908854 0.343778 0.873392 1.144961 
2 0.93916 1.064781 0.555902 1.798879 
3 0.531697 1.880771 0.270115 3.702123 
4 0.354604 2.820048 0.263321 3.797646 
5 0.256238 3.902614 0.22347 4.474883 
 
The shorter time period of the proposed frame is significant. Same frame section and mass values are used 
for both the frame shapes in dynamic analysis. Though the proposed frame shape required almost 
40~45% less members than the rectangular shape, even then it has shorter time period than the equivalent 
rectangular shape. This implies that the proposed rhombus frame is stiffer than the rectangular frame. This 
is due to the inherent property of the proposed frame shape, which exhibits more lateral stiffness than the 
rectangular shape using even less members.                          
   Inter story drift values are plotted in Figure 3 and Figure 4. This parameter is very significant in 
performance based engineering and should be within acceptable limit as per the requirement of different 
performance levels. This study does not deal with the structural design problem to satisfy the 
serviceability limits. Here the main consideration is given to the fact that if rhombus shape frame will 
experience more or less drift than the equivalent rectangular frame using same member sections. It is 
observed that the rhombus shape has less inter story drift ratios compared with the rectangular shape in 
most of the cases. 
   For the selected earthquakes with 10% probability of exceedence in 50 years, except LA12, inter story 
drifts for the proposed frame is less than the rectangular frame for all the stories. For LA12 earthquake 
record, few mid level stories experience a little bit higher inter story drift than the rectangular frame.For 
the selected earthquakes with 2% probability of exceedence in 50 years, few mid level stories experience 
more inter story drift in rhombus shape frame than the rectangular frame for LA21 and LA22 records. The 
rest of the floor level for LA21 and LA22 and all the stories for other selected records from 2/50 set, 
rhombus shape frame demand less inter story drift than the rectangular frame.  
 
1037 
 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06 0.07
Maximum Story Drift
S
to
ry
LA01, Rhombus
LA02,  Rhombus
LA11, Rhombus
LA12, Rhombus
LA01, Rectangular
LA02, Rectangular
LA11, Rectangular
LA12, Rectangular
9S-134_150_0.893-LDr (RMR,RCR)
Li
fe
 S
af
et
y 
Li
m
it
C
ol
la
ps
e 
Pr
ev
en
tio
n 
Li
m
it
 
 
Figure 3 Inter story drift for earthquakes with 10% probability of exceedence in 50 year 
 
 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06 0.07 0.08 0.09 0.1
Maximum Story Drift
St
or
y
LA21, Rhombus
LA22,  Rhombus
LA27, Rhombus
LA28, Rhombus
LA21, Rectangular
LA22, Rectangular
LA27, Rectangular
LA28, Rectangular
9S-134_150_0.893-LDr (RMR,RCR)
Li
fe
 S
af
et
y 
lim
it
C
ol
lap
se
 P
re
ve
nt
io
n 
Li
m
it
 
 
Figure 4 Inter story drift for earthquakes with 2% probability of exceedence in 50 year 
 
 
9. Conclusion 
 
The main objective of this study was to introduce an efficient frame shape for lateral force resisting frame 
system. A rhombus shape is created from the popular rectangular moment resisting frame for this purpose. 
1038 
 
The proposed shape is analyzed with ground motions of different hazard levels and then the results are 
compared with the rectangular frame with the same geometric aspect ratio. From this study the following 
conclusions can be drawn: 
 
1. Rhombus shape provides significantly higher natural frequency than the rectangular shape. The 
proposed rhombus shape frame achieves a 40~45% reduction in members than the rectangular 
frame. Even With this significant reduction in member, the rhombus shape frame exhibits higher 
lateral stiffness than the rectangular frame.  
 
2. The shorter time period in the rhombus shape frame indicates that excess stiffness and strength 
are included in that shape, which is due to expected truss action of the frame shape. 
 
3. Proposed rhombus shape demands less inter story drift in most of the cases than the rectangular 
shape moment resisting frame when subjected to selected ground motions from 10/50 sets. Few 
mid level stories in rhombus frame demand higher drift than the rectangular shape for couple of 
ground motions selected from 2/50 set.  
 
 
References 
 
AISC. 2005a. ANSI/AISC 341-05: Seismic Provisions for Structural Steel Buildings. Chicago: American 
Institute of Steel Contruction. 
ATC, 1997a, NEHRP Guidelines for the Seismic Rehabilitation of Buildings, FEMA-273, prepared by the 
Applied Technology Council, Redwood City, California, for the Building Seismic Safety Council, 
published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, Washington, DC. 
ATC, 1997b, NEHRP Commentary on the Guidelines for the Seismic Rehabilitation of Buildings, FEMA-
274, prepared by the Applied Technology Council, Redwood City, California, for the Building Seismic 
Safety Council, published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, Washington, DC. 
Bruneau, M., Uang, C. and Whittaker, A., Ductile Design of Steel Structures engineering. McGraw-Hill, 
1998. 
Chopra, A. K., Dynamics of structures theory and applications to earthquake engineering. Ed. Prentice 
Hall. 3rd ed. Upper Saddle River, N.J: Pearson/Prentice Hall, 2007. 
FEMA-273, 1997a, NEHRP Guidelines for the Seismic Rehabilitation of Buildings, prepared by the 
Applied Technology Council, Redwood City, California, for the Building Seismic Safety Council, 
published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, Washington, DC. 
FEMA-355C, 2000, State of the Art Report on Systems Performance of Steel Moment Frames Subject to 
Earthquake Ground Shaking, prepared by the SAC Joint Venture for the Federal Emergency 
Management Agency, Washington, DC. 
FEMA-355E, 2000, State of the Art Report on Past Performance of Steel Moment-Frame Buildings in 
Earthquakes, prepared by the SAC Joint Venture for the Federal Emergency Management Agency, 
Washington, DC. 
FEMA-355F, 2000, State of the Art Report on Performance Prediction and Evaluation of Steel Moment-
Frame Buildings, prepared by the SAC Joint Venture for the Federal Emergency Management Agency, 
1039 
 
Washington, DC. 
FEMA-356, 2000, Prestandard  and Commentary  for the  Seismic Rehabilitation of Buildings, prepared 
by American Society of Civil Engineers for the Federal Emergency Management Agency, Washington, 
DC. 
Goel, R.K. and Chopra, A.K., “Evaluation of Modal and FEMA Pushover Analyses: SAC Buildings,” 
Earthquake Spectra, Earthquake Engineering Research Institute,(2004):Vol. 20, No. 1, pages 225-254. 
Gupta, A. and Krawinkler, H., 1999. Seismic demands for performance evaluation of steel moment 
resisting frame structures (SAC Task 5.4.3), Report No. 132, John A. Blume Earthq.Engineering 
Center, Stanford University, Stanford, CA. 
Lee, K. and Douglas A. F., "Performance Evaluation of New Steel Frame Buildings for Seismic Loads." 
Earthquake Engineering and Structural Dynamics, 31 (2002): 653-670. 
 
Lee, K. and Douglas M. F., "Seismic Evaluation of Steel Moment Frame Buildings Designed Using 
Different R-Values." Journal of Structural Engineering, ASCE, (2006): Vol. 132, No. 9, September 1, 
1461-472. 
SAC, 1995, Interim Guidelines, Inspection, Evaluation, Repair, Upgrade and Design of Welded Moment 
Resisting Steel Structures, FEMA-267, prepared by the SAC Joint Venture for the Federal Emergency 
Management Agency, Washington, DC. Superseded b FEMA 350. 
SEAOC Vision 2000 Committee, 1995, A Framework for Performance Based Design, Volumes I, II, and 
III, Structural Engineers Association of California (SEAOC), Sacramento, California. 
Sindel, Z., Akbas, R. and Tezcan, S.S., “Drift control and damage in tall buildings”, Engineering 
Structures, (1996): Vol. 18, No. 12, pp. 957-966. 
Somerville, P., Smith, N., Punyamurthula, S. and Sun, J., 1997. Development of ground motion time 
histories for phase 2 of the FEMA/SAC steel project, SAC Background Document Report No. 
SAC/BD-9/04, SAC Joint Venture, 555 University Ave., Sacramento, CA. 
Steel Construction Manual, 13th Edition (Book). New York: American Institute of Steel Construction, 
2006.
1040 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
ASSESSMENT OF STATUS OF GROUNDWATER ARSENIC CONTAMINATION AND 
COMMUNITY VULNERABILITY FOR SUSTAINABLE DRINKING WATER SUPPLY 
AT MURADNAGAR UPAZILA UNDR COMILLA DISTRICT, BANGLADESH 
 
 
Engr. Motaleb Hossain Sarker1 
 
 
ABSTRACT: Arsenic contamination has become one of the dangerous environmental threats 
and a serious health risk in Bangladesh. Arsenic contamination of drinking water is a significant 
healthy problem in rural areas of the country. In Bangladesh more than 90% of rural households 
depend on water supply from groundwater for drinking and other domestic usage. Due to arsenic 
contamination in groundwater, the extent and severity of this problem has placed a large part of 
the country in a most vulnerable situation. Screening of 4.7 million tube wells in arsenic affected 
upazilas showed that 29% of these have arsenic in excess of the Bangladesh standard. It is 
estimated that 20-25 million peoples are at risk from arsenic in these upazilas. More than 10 
thousand patients, suffering from chronic arsenic poisoning, so far have been identified. Further, 
Muradnagar upazila is highly populated and highly arsenic contaminated area where population 
density is more 1300 people/km2. More than 80% of the tube wells under this upazila has arsenic 
contamination rate greater than 50 ppb which is far higher than WHO standard for safe drinking. 
The important constraint of Muradnagar upazila is to abstract groundwater from deep aquifer due 
to availability of natural gases and oil. In this regards, different government, non-government and 
international agencies have introduced different types of alternate safe water options in arsenic 
affected areas of the Muradnagar upazila. The major alternate safe water options that have been 
found in the study area are (i) Pond Sand Filter (PSF), (ii) Rainwater Harvesting system (RWH), 
(iii) Dug well etc. The main objective of the study was to assess the status of groundwater arsenic 
contamination and community vulnerability for sustainable drinking water supply at Muradnagar 
upazila under Comilla District of Bangladesh.  
   Thus the study focused on GIS based assessment of arsenic contamination status and as well as 
the performance of available alternate safe water options including community vulnerability for 
sustainable and to ensure the safe drinking water for arsenic affected areas. The major activities 
of the study were (i) testing arsenic contamination using field test kit, (ii) field survey using GPS 
and field questionnaires, (iii) data processing and database preparation, (iv) multi-criteria based 
data analysis and mapping of community vulnerability due arsenic contamination using GIS and 
(v) evaluation of performance of the available alternate safe water options including community 
                                                
1 Director(Ecology), Center for Environmental and Geographic Information Services 
(CEGIS), mob: 01715-015419; email: mhsarker@cegisbd.com 
1041 
 
perception for sustainable drinking water management and to raise awareness among the affected 
community for the benefit of rural people of Bangladesh. The study shows that (i) more than 30% 
of study tube well of the upazila has became red (unsafe), (ii) the dug well technology is not 
suitable for Muradnagar upazila as because of gases and oil present at upper aquifer, (iii) 
substantial amount ponds are under usable condition those can be used for PSF and house or 
village pipe water supply system for sustainable drinking water supply; (v) PSF is one of the 
major sources of alternate safe water technology for the study area. 
 
 Keywords: arsenic contamination, alternate safe water option, community vulnerability, 
sustainable, alternate drinking water, community perception and GIS mapping. 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Arsenic is one of the elements which are available different places of the earth's crust. It is 
released into the environment through a variety of natural and anthropogenic ways. Arsenic 
occurs in rocks, soil, water, and air. The primary source of arsenic in the natural environment is 
arsenic bearing minerals, mostly ores containing sulfide along with copper, nickel, lead, cobalt 
and other metals. Arsenic in soils is mainly derived from its parent rock materials. Weathering of 
rocks converts arsenic-rich metal sulfides to arsenic trioxides, which eventually find their way 
into surface water, groundwater and sediment.  Arsenic is present in the soils of Bangladesh and 
is supplemented each year by river borne sediment in which arsenic is formed by the weathering 
of arsenic-rich minerals and rocks in the upstream basins.The groundwater is the main sources of 
water supply in urban and rural areas of Bangladesh but the groundwater for drinking purposes 
has become a problem (ITN, BUET, 2002) due (i) arsenic in groundwater, (ii) excessive 
dissolved iron, (iii) salinity in the shallow aquifers in the coastal areas, (iv) lowering the 
groundwater level during dry season and (v) rock/stony layers in hilly area. Thus the arsenic 
contamination of drinking water is a significant health problem in rural areas of Bangladesh. In 
Bangladesh more than 90% of rural households depend on water supply from the groundwater 
source for drinking and other domestic usage. Due to arsenic contamination in groundwater and 
the extent and severity of this problem has placed a large part of the country in a most vulnerable 
situation. Screening of 4.7 million tube wells in arsenic affected upazilas showed that 29% of 
these have arsenic in excess of the Bangladesh standard. It is estimated that 20-25 million peoples 
are at risk from arsenic in these upazilas. More than 10 thousand patients, suffering from chronic 
arsenic poisoning, so far have been identified. Further, Muradnagar upazila is highly populated 
and highly arsenic contaminated area where population density is more 1300 people/km2. More 
than 80% of the tube wells under this upazila has arsenic contamination rate greater than 50 ppb 
which is far higher than WHO standard for safe drinking. The important constrain of Muradnagar 
upazila is to abstract groundwater from deep aquifer due availability of natural gases and oil. In 
this regards, different government, non-government and international agencies have introduced 
different types of alternate safe water options in arsenic affected areas of the Muradnagar upazila. 
Department of Public Health Engineering (DPHE) and different non-government organization 
(NGO) have been involved in arsenic mitigation activities with assistance from different 
development organization like UNICEF, DANIDA and World Bank etc. DPHE has been 
deploying the different alternate safe water options (rainwater harvesting, dug well and pond sand 
1042 
 
filter etc.) in arsenic affected area. Proper and cost optimized arsenic mitigation planning 
activities can be done properly through identification of vulnerable community in arsenic affected 
area. Thus, a pilot initiative were taken assess the arsenic contamination status and identify the 
vulnerable community in Muradnagar upazila  through GIS based multi-criteria analysis to assist 
in optimize planning activities of DPHE/UNICEF for deployment of sustainable alternate safe 
water options to ensure the arsenic free drinking water. 
 
2. Objectives 
 
The main objective of the project is to assist UNICEF/DPHE or relevant decision makers for the 
identification of the most vulnerable communities and prioritizing the planning and budgeting for 
ongoing arsenic mitigation work.  The overall objective of the project is to assess the status of 
groundwater arsenic contamination and community vulnerability for sustainable drinking water 
supply at Muradnagar upazila under Comilla District, Bangladesh using GIS technology. 
   The overall objective of the project is to develop an extended database and a prototype DSS to 
help users retrieve and analyze arsenic related information, identify vulnerable communities, plan 
mitigation and monitor the impact of the arsenic mitigation work. The specific objectives are (i) 
identification of most vulnerable communities; (ii) development of arsenic database for arsenic 
contamination status; (iii) analysis of vulnerability profile of communities and (iv) development 
of community vulnerability maps due to arsenic contamination. 
 
3. Study Area 
 
The study area comprises the Muradnagar upazila under Commilla district of Bangladesh. The 
total population in the study area is about 467320 with the population density of 1363 person / 
square km (BBS, 2001). More than 90% of tube wells have arsenic concentration of greater than 
50 pbb which is unsafe. The population density in the study area has the incremental trend which 
indicates the more peoples are exposed to the arsenic hazard with time. 
 
4. Methodology 
 
The study has been carried out following the systematic approaches are: (i) conceptualization of 
arsenic vulnerability, (ii) framework design for multi-criteria analysis, (iii) collection and 
processing of data, (iv) computation of arsenic vulnerability index; (v) preparation of arsenic 
vulnerability maps and (vi) evaluation of performance of the available alternate safe water 
options. The brief descriptions of different steps of the methodology are given below: 
 
5. Conceptualization of Arsenic Vulnerability 
 
Vulnerability can be defined as a function of exposure to a hazard and the capacity to cope with 
the hazard. In this context, there can be a number of factors, which influence the vulnerability of 
people to arsenic contamination. Vulnerability is a twofold concept, which entails the likelihood 
of events that may result in a series of negative livelihood outcomes, as well as the coping 
mechanisms that people employ to face such risk events. The vulnerability due to arsenic 
contamination in drinking water impacting water security is defined in terms of its domestic use: 
1043 
 
access at all times to sufficient safe water to meet all personal needs for an active and healthy life. 
Vulnerability also varies with the type of community, such as: if a tube-well located at a school 
or near a health center is affected by arsenic, the scope of vulnerability will be more than if a 
tube-well is used by a household even though the contamination level is the same. The arsenic 
vulnerability analysis can be done through developing model or multi-criteria analysis. The 
arsenic vulnerability is guided by several determinants or indicators such as, arsenic hazard, 
coping capacity, socio-economic status, resources available and other health related parameters, 
etc. These indicators are governed by different parameters. Vulnerability to arsenic is calculated 
considering different indicators and their parameter values. For arsenic mitigation purposes 
arsenic vulnerability mapping is very useful for identifying highly vulnerable communities.   
 
6. Framework Design for Multi-Criteria Analysis 
 
Using the expert knowledge and consultation process the basic requirements for the initial 
framework of the multi-criteria analysis were identified as (i) administrative unit of vulnerability 
calculation, (ii) determinants/indicators of the arsenic vulnerability, (iii) listed criteria for each 
indicator, and (iv) weight of the determinants etc. The Delphi process was studied to get the 
weight of the different indicators including the computation indicators. In the Delphi process, the 
users select the weight of the indicators, which they can change as per the objective or rationale 
of the DSS. The union-wise vulnerability was calculated considering the mauza, i.e., the lowest 
administrative unit. Upazila-wise vulnerability was also calculated based on the lowest 
administrative unit (mauza). The different types of determinants that were identified for the study 
are (i) Hazards, (ii) Resource, (iii) Coping capacity and (iv) Health. Further, the criteria and 
indicators for each determinant were also defined through studying and brainstorming. Based on 
the criteria and indicators need of the data were also assessed. The criteria and indicators under 
each determinant are given in Table 1. 
 
Table 1: List of criteria and indicators for vulnerability analysis 
 
Determinants 
or Indicators 
Indicators (parameters) Hypothesized functional relationship  
% of red TWs The higher the % of Red TWs the higher 
the vulnerability  
Average arsenic concentration The higher the concentration the higher the 
vulnerability 
Arsenic 
hazard 
%  of people drinking water from 
red TWs 
The higher the % the higher the 
vulnerability 
% of green TWs The higher the % of green TWs the lower 
the vulnerability 
Average distance to usable pond The greater distance the higher the 
vulnerability  
Resource  
Average distance to safe water 
options 
The greater the distance the higher the 
vulnerability 
Coping 
capacity 
% of population aware of arsenic The Higher the % the lower the 
vulnerability 
1044 
 
Determinants 
or Indicators 
Indicators (parameters) Hypothesized functional relationship  
Average distance to hospital The greater the distance the higher the 
vulnerability 
Socio-economic status 
Education level 
Roof material 
Floor material 
Wall material 
Radio/TV 
The higher the education level the higher 
the awareness and lower the vulnerability 
If the material is concrete/bricks, the 
household owners are rich and their coping 
capacity is high and their vulnerability is 
low 
If the households have TV/radio, they are 
more aware of the arsenic hazard and their 
vulnerability is low.   
Health No. of patients The greater the number of patients in a 
mauza the higher the vulnerability 
 
 
7. Collection and Processing of Data and Development af Database 
 
Data collection and processing were according to the data requirement of multi-criteria 
framework. Two categories data were collected for this study are (i) secondary data from 
different sources and primary data from the field. The The field data collection process was 
designed for arsenic vulnerability computation in a thumb rule of random selections. Following 
that rule 20 tube-wells (16 red and 4 green) per mauza were randomely selected and different 
parameters required for multi-criteria framework were collected from the field using GPS and a 
pre-defined and developed field questionnaire. Furthermore, arsenic contamination levels were 
also tested for both tube-wells and water stored in households for the purpose of drinking.The 
database development process for the study is given in Figure 1.  
 
8. Computation of Arsenic Vulnerability Index  
 
Vulnerability is a function of exposure a hazard and the capacity to cope with the hazard. Arsenic 
vulnerability depends on a number of factors, which influence the vulnerability of people to 
arsenic contamination such as (i) characteristics and condition of the community, (ii) accessibility 
to local resources and  (iii) coping capacity to prevent the hazard, etc. Further, the degree or 
magnitudes of arsenic vulnerability depends on different parameters such as (i) availability of 
safe water, (ii) community exposure to arsenic hazard (iii) accessibility to safe water, (iv) 
capacity to use safe water, (iv) actual use of safe water and (v) capacity to cope with arsenic risk 
etc. It is to be mentioned that vulnerability index computed based on the different indicator used 
for this study is presented in Table 1 earlier.  
   A formula was developed to calculate the vulnerability Index following systematic steps i.e, 
(i)formuale development for different indicator calculation, (ii) formulae and lookup table 
development to calculate the scores of different indicators/parameters and (iii) vulnerability index 
computation (VI). For the calculation of indicator parameters different formulae were developed 
based on the indicator parameters chosen for vulnerability calculation. For the calculation of 
1045 
 
indicator parameters different formulae were developed based on the indicator parameters chosen 
for vulnerability calculation. The brief description of some formulae are described below: 
 
 Equation 1: 
 
A = (RA/T2001)*100 
 
Where,  A = % Red tube-wells in a mauza 
RA = Adjusted number of red tube-wells in a mauza 
  T2001 = Total number of tube-wells in a mauza from 2001 data 
 
Equation 2:  
 
B = ( Arsenic level value)/ (Number of total tube-wells from 2001 data) 
 
Where,  B = Average arsenic concentration of a mauza 
 
Equation 3:  
 
C = [{Population (STWred + OtherTWred)}/ {Tpop of sample survey)]*100 
 
Where, C = % Total people drink water from red tube-wells  
  STWred = Number of people drink water from the same (their own) red tube-
wells 
  OtherTWred = Number of people drink water from other red tube-wells 
 
Equation 4:  
 
D = (GA/T2001)*100 
 
Where,  D = % of green tube-wells in a mauza 
GA = Estimated number of green tube-wells in a mauza 
  T2001 = Total number of tube-wells in a mauza from 2001 data 
 
Equation 5: 
H = Distance from household to main health center  
 
Equation 6:  
I= Socio-economic status  
Parameter I   = Socio-economic status   
  = (Value of I1 + Value of I2 + Value of I3 + Value of I4 Value of I5) / 5 
I1 = Education level (from Lookup table 6.1) 
1046 
 
I2 = Roof material (from Lookup table 6.2) 
I3 = Floor material (from Lookup table 6.2) 
I4 = Wall material (from Lookup table 6.3) 
I5 = Radio/ TV (from Lookup table 6.4) 
 
Table 6.1: For Education Level 
 
Education Level Type Level Score 
5, 6 Graduate 10 
3, 4 SSC – HSC 50 
2 Five – Ten 70 
1. 7 Under Primary 100 
 
Table 6.2: Roof and Floor Material 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 6.3: For Wall Material 
                                        
 
 
 
 
Table 6.4: For Radio/TV 
 
Has Radio/TV Score 
Yes 10 
No 100 
 
Equation 7:  
J = % Patient data (from APSU/UNICEF data) used as percentage through normalization. 
Data used: Population 1991 (BBS) and patient data from UNICEF 
 
% Patient = (Tpat / Tpop)*100 
Material Type  Score (Roof) Score (Floor) 
1 10 100 
2 20 50 
3 60 20 
4 100 80 
Material Type Score 
1 80 
2 10 
3 40 
4 100 
1047 
 
 
Where, Tpat = Number of total patients in a mauza 
  Tpop = Total population in a mauza 
 
9.  Development of Formulae for Score Calculation 
 
After the computation of different indicator parameters, the individual parameter scores were 
calculated through developing different formulae. There are two types of score computation 
formulae developed for ADSS; they are (i) relative score calculation formulae and (ii) absolute 
score calculation. The relative score formulas are described in the next page: 
 
1. Score A =  [(Xbest – X)/(Xbest – Xworst)]*10 
 
Where A = % of Red TW 
Xbest = Lowest value; Xworst = Highest value; X = Value of a parameter 
       2. Score B = from Lookup Table 6.5 
 Where B = Average arsenic concentration 
 
Lookup Table 6.5: For Average Arsenic Concentration 
 
Arsenic Concentration Score 
0-0.02 1 
0.02-0.05 2 
0.05-0.10 4 
0.10-0.20 6 
>0.20 10 
 
3. Score C = [(Xbest – X)/ (Xbest – Xworst)]*10 
 
Where C = % of total people who drink water from red TWs 
Xbest = Lowest value; Xworst = Lowest value; X = Value of a parameter 
 
Final Score for Arsenic Hazard = Average Score of indicators (A, B, C) * Weight, (weight used = 
0.4) 
Score for Resources: 
 
4. Score D = [(Xbest – X)/ (Xbest – Xworst)]*10 
 
Where D = Score for % of green TWs; Xbest = Highest value; Xworst = Lowest value; X = Value of a 
parameter 
 
5. Score E = from Lookup Table 6.6 
Where E = Distance from Household to usable Ponds (median value) 
 
 
1048 
 
 
 
Lookup Table 6.6: For distance from Household to usable Ponds and nearest safe water options 
 
Distance (m) Score 
0 – 100 1 
100 – 300 3 
300 – 500 6 
> 500 10 
 
6. Score F = from Lookup Table 6.6 
Where F = distance from Household to nearest safe water options (median value) 
Lookup Table 6.6: For distance from Household to nearest safe water options 
Final Score for Resources = Average score of indicators (D, E, F) * Weight, (weight used = 0.2) 
Score for Coping Capacity: 
7. Score G = [(Xbest – X)/ (Xbest – Xworst)]*10 
 
Where G = % of population aware of arsenic 
 
Xbest = Highest value; Xworst = Lowest value; X = Value of a parameter 
 
8. Score H = from Lookup Table 6.7 
Where H = distance from Household to main Health Center (median value) 
 
Table 6.7: For distance from Household to main Health Center 
 
Distance (m) Score 
0 – 2000 1 
2000 – 5000 3 
5000 - 10000 6 
> 10000 10 
 
9. Score I = from Lookup Table 6.8 
Where I = Socio-economic status 
 
Table 6.8: Socio-economic status 
 
Status value Score 
0 – 40 1 
40 – 70 5 
70 – 100 10 
 
Final score for Resources = Average score of indicators (G, H, I) * Weight (weight used = 0.2) 
1049 
 
Score for Health: 
 
10. Score J = [(Xbest – X)/(Xbest – Xworst)]*100 
 
Where J = % of patients per mauza; Xbest = Lowest value; Xworst = Highest value 
X = Value of a parameter; Final Score Health = Average score of indicators (J) * weight 
(weight used = 0.2) 
 
Final Vulnerability Index: 
 
After computing the indicator parameters and individual scores, the vulnerability index was then 
calculated using the following formula: 
 
ii WScoreVI *  
 
Where, VI = Vulnerability Index 
iScore  = Vulnerability scores for Indicator i. 
iW = Weight for Indicator i 
and 1 iW  
Again 
iIndicatorunderparametersof
ScoreP
Score iji #
_
  
  
Where, ijScoreP _ = Score for parameter j under indicator i 
Different weight for indicators used for the study has given in Lookup Table 6.9.  
 
Table 6.9: Weight of different indicators determined by Delphi process 
 
SL. No. Indicators Weight 
1 Hazard 0.39 
2 Resources 0.23 
3 Coping 0.19 
4 Health 0.19 
 
10. Evaluation of Performance of the Available Alternate Safe Water Options  
 
A detail questionnaire survey has also been carried out to assess the functional condition and user 
perception of the available alternate safe water technologies. The major alternate safe water 
options were available in the study area are (i) Pond Sand Filter (PSF), (ii) Rainwater Harvesting 
system (RWH), (iii) Dug well etc. Further, the focus group discussions (FGD) were also 
organized to achieve the study goal and substantial result has been obtained. 
 
 
1050 
 
 
Table 3: Union-wise % Green (safe) tube-wells that have become red (unsafe) at Muradnagar 
Upazila 
 
Remained Green Green TW that became Red Union 
  
Total green 
TW 
Surveyed  
<10 20-
40 
50 Total<=50 60-
80 
100100-
200 
200-
300 
300-
400 
400-
500 
Total>50%(>50)
Akubpur 19 5 4 4 13 1  1 3 1  6 32 
Andikot 32 19 4 5 28   3 1   4 13 
Chapitala 7 1 1 4 6   1    1 14 
Chhaliakandi 16 2 1 4 7 1 3 4  1  9 56 
Dakshin 
Paharpur 10 1  1 2  1 2 1 2 2 8 80 
Dakshin 
Ramchandrapur 12 3 2 1 6  2 4    6 50 
Darora (Purba) 18 2 3 4 9 3 2 3 1   9 50 
Dhamghar 43 10 8 8 26 1 5 7 3 1  17 40 
Jahapur 30 12 2 2 16 3  6 3 1 1 14 47 
Muradnagar 36 26 6 1 33   1 1  1 3 8 
Paschim 
Bangara 13   2 2 1 3 6 1   11 85 
Paschim 
Jatrapur 2 1  1 2       0 0 
Paschim 
Nabipur 7 2 1 1 4 1  2    3 43 
Paschim 
Purbadhair 20 5 4 5 14 3  2 1   6 30 
Purba Bangara 5 2   2  1 1 1   3 60 
Purba Jatrapur 5 1  1 2  1 2    3 60 
Purba 
Purbadhair 39 30 3  33  1 4 1   6 15 
Sreekail 22 4 7 3 14 1 1 5   1 8 36 
Tanki 8  2 3 5  2 1    3 38 
Uttar Paharpur 6 1 2  3   2 1   3 50 
Uttar 
Ramchandrapur 5 1 3 1 5       0 0 
Total 355 128 53 51 232 15 22 57 18 6 5 123 35 
% Total  36 15 14 65 4 6 16 5 2 1 35  
 
Table 3: Functioning status different safe water options at Muradnagar 
 
Technology  ALCAN Dug Well Filter TW HDTW PSF RWH Usable ponds 
No 9 - - 200 167 8 461 
 
1051 
 
      
 
 
Figure 1: Arsenic vulnerability map of the study area. 
 
 
 
 
1052 
 
11. Data Analysis Result and Discussion 
 
Following the methodology community vulnerability due to arsenic hazard were computed and 
analyzed which has been presented in Figure 1. From Figure 1 it is observed that that Sreekail, 
Purba and Paschim Jatrapur and Paschim Bangra union are highly and only Purba Purbadhair 
union is less vulnerable in compare to other unions. Further different type of analysis has also 
been done for the study based on the collected data. One of the important analyses done for the 
study area is that substantial amount of safe (green arsenic concentration < 50 pbb) tube well 
became unsafe (red - arsenic concentration > 50 pbb) which more than 30%. The analysis result 
presented in  Table 2. From the Table 2, it has been observed that Dhamghar union has the 
highest percentage (17%) of tube well became red and Chapitala union has the lowest percentage 
(1%) of tube well became red. Comparing the vulnerability maps and data analysis result in Table 
2, it is found that there is no correlation between % of tube well became red because vulnerability 
has been calculated through multi-criteria analysis using different indicators and indicator 
parameters. From the Table 3 it is found that more  than 450 ponds are usable and more than 150 
PSF (pond sand filter) are at functional status. The Table 3 also shows that there is no dug well in 
the Muradnagra area because gases and oil in the upper aquifer. Further weight of different 
indicators is another important factors which also influence the vulnerability result. However, this 
type analysis could be very helpful for the planners and decision makers in cost optimized 
planning and implementation of arsenic mitigation activities for safe of rural poor people of 
Bangladesh. 
 
12. Major Findings 
 
The studies carried out with due care and major findings of the study are as below: 
 More than 30% of study tube well of the upazila has became red (unsafe) within 5 years  
 The dug well technology is not suitable for Muradnagar upazila as because of gases and 
oil present at upper aquifer 
 Substantial amount ponds are under usable condition those can be used for PSF and 
house or village pipe water supply system for sustainable drinking water supply 
 PSF is one of the major sources of alternate safe water technology for the study area 
 
References 
 
Ahmed, M. Firoze, Ph.D, (2002), Alternative Water Supply Options for Arsenic Affected Areas 
of Bangladesh, ITN, BUET 
World Health Organization (WHO), (1996), Guidelines for Drinking Water Quality, Second 
Edition, Vol2, Health Criteria and other Supporting Information, WHO, Geneva. 
BGS/DFID, 2001, Arsenic contamination of groundwater in Bangladesh (Vol1-Vol 4), British 
Geological Survey and Department of International Development (DFID) 
BBS, (2001), Bangladesh Bureau of statistics, Population Census 01, 2001. 
 1053 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS ON WATER RELATED SECTORS OF DHAKA CITY 
AND ASSESSING THE PLAUSIBLE ADAPTATION OPTIONS 
 
 
Rifat Quamrul Alam1 and Bushra Monowar Duti2 
 
 
ABSTRACT: Dhaka, the capital of Bangladesh is portrayed as an example of highly 
overpopulated city, with excessive stress on its environmental resource leading towards a 
threatening level of environmental degradation. Dhaka comprises a population of around 12 
million. With immense stress on its existing natural resource and providing minimal level of 
services and utilities to its inhabitant makes it difficult to maintain a normal urban life in Dhaka. 
All of these adverse conditions will be further amplified due to the impact of global climate 
change. Generally, the relation of climate change impact in different sectors of an urban area is 
highly complex and interconnected in several ways, which can be seen in case of Dhaka. Among 
all the sectors, water related sectors of Dhaka are highly vulnerable to the projected impact of 
climate change. Dhaka has a number of interconnected canals and rivers surrounding its 
periphery, which is highly vulnerable due to the amalgamated effect of urbanization, 
environmental degradation and climate change. This impact on surface water bodies combines 
with the depletion of groundwater table, the chief source for supply of drinking water for the 
inhabitants of Dhaka. Erratic precipitation pattern due to climate change also has a 
multidimensional impact. This paper focuses on water related sectors of Dhaka and critically 
reviews the projected impacts of climate change on it. Available historical data of hydro-
meteorological stations located in the study area has been analyzed to address climate change. 
Water security for fresh water resource is assessed as availability and accessibility of water. For 
the plausible adaptation option, a cluster based approach has been proposed in this paper. This 
proposed approach pursues to provide a clear pathway towards sustainable development 
incorporating relevant framework. 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
1.1. Climate Change and Dhaka 
 
Dhaka, the capital of Bangladesh is portrayed as an example of highly overpopulated city, with 
excessive stress on its environmental resource leading towards a threatening level of 
environmental degradation. Dhaka has an enormous population, having around 11,875 thousand 
people living in an area of 1,464 km2 with a growth rate of 1.8% (BBS, 2011). With immense 
stress on its existing natural resource and providing minimal level of services and utilities to its 
                                                        
1Professional, Climate Change Study Division, CEGIS, Dhaka, Bangladesh. mridul2040@gmail.com  
2Professional, Climate Change Study Division, CEGIS, Dhaka, Bangladesh. bushra.monowar@gmail.com  
 1054 
inhabitant makes it difficult to maintain a normal urban life in Dhaka. Among the key 11 cities of 
Asia, Dhaka is ranked as the most vulnerable to climate change impacts , having a vulnerability 
score of 9 in a scale of 10 (WWF, 2009). All of these adverse conditions will be further amplified 
due to the impact of global climate change. Generally, the relation of climate change impact in 
different sectors of an urban area is highly complex and interconnected in several ways, which 
can be seen in case of Dhaka. Among all the sectors, water related sectors of Dhaka are highly 
vulnerable to the projected impact of climate change. Dhaka has a number of interconnected 
canals and rivers surrounding its periphery, which is highly vulnerable due to the amalgamated 
effect of urbanization, environmental degradation and climate change. This impact on surface 
water bodies combines with the depletion of groundwater table, the chief source for supply of 
drinking water for the inhabitants of Dhaka. Erratic precipitation pattern due to climate change 
also has a multidimensional impact. Being the capital of the country, a large number of people 
migrates each year to Dhaka in search for their livelihood. The number of people will be 
increased further, when climate induced extreme weather event will affect the coastal belts and as 
a result, people living in those region will become climate refuges. 
 
1.2. Objective of the study 
 
The objective of this study is to focus on water related sectors of Dhaka and critically reviews the 
projected impacts of climate change on it. Available historical data of hydro-meteorological 
stations located in the study area, Dhaka has been analyzed to identify change in climatic pattern.  
Water security for fresh water resource is assessed as availability and accessibility of water. In 
this paper, a cluster based approach has been proposed incorporating the plausible climate change 
adaptation options for water sector. 
 
1.3. Limitations of the study 
 
This paper chiefly focuses on indentifying the plausible adaptation options based on a cluster 
basis. However, for a full scale adaptation plan suitable for Dhaka, all existing policies, legal 
frameworks related to water sector has to be analyzed, keeping the provision for the co-ordination 
of different government and other organizations.     
 
2. Methodology 
 
2.1. Meteorological data 
 
Dhaka has one meteorological stations of Bangladesh Meteorological Department . The climatic 
parameters (as shown in Table 1 ) of this station were considered for this paper. 
 
Table 1 Meteorological Parameters 
 
Parameters Range of Data analyzed 
Rainfall 
Temperature 
1953-2008 
1953-2008 
 
 1055 
A major concern for this paper was to divide Dhaka in different climatic seasons to indentify the 
change in climatic pattern precisely. Dhaka has an erratic land use pattern with less vegetation 
cover, more industry and households. A number of previous studies have classified the climatic 
seasons of Bangladesh based on various factors. In National Water Management Plan (NWMP, 
2001) the climatic seasons were classified as Critical Dry (Feb-Apr), Late Dry (May), Monsoon 
(June-Oct) and Early Dry (Nov-Jan). For this paper, the following seasons were considered 
 
 Pre-monsoon (March - May) 
 Monsoon (June - September) 
 Post-monsoon (October - November) 
 Dry (December - February) 
 
For temperature, averages of maximum and minimum temperature of each month were taken and 
then averages of maximum and minimum temperature were analyzed yearly to identify temporal 
variation. 
 
2.2.  Groundwater level 
 
Groundwater level data was analyzed in order to assess the current situation of groundwater and 
trend. The municipal water supply system of Dhaka chiefly depends on groundwater. The water 
security for Dhaka in terms of accessibility and availability is closely associated with 
groundwater and climate induced impact like rainfall pattern affects the level of recharge of 
groundwater. Selected groundwater level stations situated in Dhaka of Bangladesh Water 
Development Board were analyzed in this connection.   
 
3. Analysis and Result 
 
3.1. Pattern of rainfall 
 
For a time series dataset, the correlation can assessed using Pearson’s Correlation coefficient R, 
or coefficient of determination, R2. The result of pre-monsoon and monsoon average rainfall 
analysis in decadal wise is shown in graphical form in Figure 1 and Figure 2,  
 
  
 1056 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1 Analysis of average Pre-Monsoon Rainfall from 1953-2008 
 
 
  
 1057 
  
  
 
Figure 2 Analysis of average Monsoon Rainfall from 1953-2008 
 
From the analysis, it is found that for pre-monsoon and monsoon, the pattern of rainfall for 2001-
2008 is different from the last three decades. For monsoon, the average rainfall for 2001-08 has a 
positive uprising trend with 0.988 mm rainfall per year, where average rainfall of other decades 
shows a downward trend. For pre-monsoon, the average rainfall of 1991-2000 has a positive 
upward trend of 0.245 mm rainfall per year but other decade’s shows a negative downward trend. 
The analysis performed for post monsoon and dry period suggest that the pattern of average 
rainfall of 2001-2008 has a difference from other decades. For dry period, the average rainfall of 
2001-2008 has a positive upward trend of 0.105 mm rainfall per year but other decade’s shows a 
negative downward trend. 
 
3.2.  Pattern of Temperature 
 
The analysis of average of maximum temperature and average of minimum temperature is shown 
in Figure 3 (a) and (b). From the analysis, it is found that both average of maximum and 
minimum temperature has an uprising trend. The average of maximum temperature shows a 
positive uprising trend of 0.010 ºC per year, and the average of minimum temperature shows a 
positive uprising trend of 0.019 ºC per year.  
 1058 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
 
Figure 3 Analysis showing average of Maximum and Minimum temperature from 1953-2008 
 
3.3. Pattern of groundwater level 
 
The analysis of groundwater level was conducted for the 4 BWDB stations situated in 4 parts of 
Dhaka city. 
Table 2 Groundwater level stations and location 
Station ID Location 
DHA008 Dhaka, Keraniganj, Basta, Bamonsur 
DHA010 Dhaka, Mirpur,  New Sewra Para 
DHA017 Dhaka, Savar, Biralia, Savar 
DHA021 Dhaka, Sutrapur,Jaganath College 
 
The analysis shows that all groundwater stations has a sharp downward trend, indicating that the 
groundwater level of Dhaka city is lowering in a excessively high rate. This also indicates that 
future water security based on groundwater is under threat.   
 1059 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4 Analysis showing groundwater level of 4 stations of Dhaka 
 
3.4. Major findings 
 
The result of analysis of the hydro-meteorological parameters shows that there is a significant 
change in the climatic pattern. The temperature has a increasing trend and the rainfall pattern is 
becoming more erratic. The erratic pattern of rainfall reinforces the following risk for Dhaka city. 
 Water logging problem due to erratic rainfall 
 Flash flood and drainage congestion due to excessive / early rainfall 
Groundwater, the chief fresh water source for Dhaka is at a vulnerable state and availability of 
groundwater has a potential risk. This can be interpreted as the water security of Dhaka in terms 
of availability and accessibility is at stake. 
 
4.  Adaptation Option: Cluster based approach  
 
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC, 2007) defines adaptation as the 
"adjustment in natural or human systems in response to actual or expected climatic stimuli or 
their effects, which moderates harm or exploits beneficial opportunities". For identifying the 
plausible adaptation options for water related sectors in Dhaka, the driving factor is the water 
 1060 
security. Some studies has given emphasis on mainstreaming climate change adaptation in 
national policy. Also, the Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan of Bangladesh (BCCSAP), 
which is based on 6 pillars, have several adaptation components in each pillar (MoEF, 2009). The 
proposed approach for plausible adaptation option in this paper is relevant but not necessarily 
restricted to the policies and programs related to climate change adaptation program of BCCSAP. 
The proposed adaptation approach is presented in Figure 5. It comprises of 4 major components.  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4 Proposed approach for plausible adaptation option in water sector  
 
The description for each component is given below. 
 
4.1. Component-1: Surface water treatment and use  
 
To achieve water security and to cope with the climate induced impacts, the use of surface water 
has to be increased and the dependence on groundwater has to shift. In order to ensure the proper 
use of existing surface water bodies, small and large scale treatment plants is highly needed. Also, 
the concept of 3R (reuse, reduce, recycle) is significant in this component. 
 
4.2. Component-2: Climate Friendly Technology 
 
Climate friendly products and technologies of small scale is important for water sector. The use 
of grey water in households and auto switching / smart pump controllers are important in this 
regard. 
 
4.3. Development and Infrastructure 
 
To cope with the extreme natural events due to climate change like flash flood from erratic 
rainfall and drainage congestion, the appropriate adaptation plan is to rehabilitation of existing 
infrastructures like pipe and drainage network.  
 
 1061 
4.4. Joint Network for integrated decision 
 
A joint network including all concerned ministries and government organizations engaged in 
different positions is required in order to maintain proper co-ordination of each adaptation 
program. Also, information and knowledge transfer is vital for this network.  
 
5. Conclusion 
 
Due to its high socio-economic importance, development and industrialization has always been a 
integral part of Dhaka. But now it is high time to consider the scope of climate change adaptation 
options in each individual process, as the impact of climate change is unavoidable, and it will be 
amplified much more for the water sector of Dhaka. This paper gives a tentative look towards the 
plausible adaptation options for water sector in macro scale. To select and implement a individual 
component, a micro level study of that component considering all environmental, social and 
economical elements is needed.    
 
 
References 
 
Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics. (2011). Population & Housing Census: Preliminary Results-
2011., Ministry of Planning, GoB, Dhaka, Bangladesh 
IPCC, (2007): Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability; Contribution of 
Working Group II to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change [Parry, Martin L., Canziani, Osvaldo F., Palutikof, Jean P., van der Linden, 
Paul J., and Hanson, Clair E. (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United 
Kingdom, 1000 pp. 
MoEF, (2009). Bangladesh Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan-2009, Ministry of 
Environment and Forests, Government of the People's Republic of Bangladesh, Dhaka, 
Bangladesh. xvi + pp 68. 
MoEF. (2005). National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA), Final report. Dhaka: Ministry 
of Environment and Forest (MoEF), Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh. 
MoWR. (2001). National Water Management Plan. Ministry of Water Resources, Government of 
The People’s Republic of Bangladesh. 
WWF, (2009). Mega Stress for Mega Cities: A Climate Vulnerability Ranking of Major Coastal 
Cities in Asia. WWF International, Switzerland 
 
 1062 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
INDUSTRIAL POLLUTION IN RAJSHAHI CITY, BANGLADESH 
 
 
S. M. Helal Uddin1, Md. Rasidul Hasan2, Md. Shohel Syeduzzaman3 and Md. Belal Hossain 
Sikder4 
  
 
ABSTRACT: Rajshahi is the 4th longest divisional head quarters and it known as an Education, 
Silk green City of Bangladesh. Although Rajshahi is not a major industrial area but industrial 
waste may have a significant effect on agricultural production where wastewater is being used. 
There are 558 small and medium industry of them rubber and plastic, cotton and spinning mill, 
cigarette factory, match factory, glass factory, soap factory, iron and metal factory, rice and oil 
mills, handloom, dairy product, food industries, pharmaceutical industries. But most of the 
industries going on without site clearness certificates, Effluents Treatment Plants (ETPs) and 
irregular inspection of industries by DOE. Wastewater of the jute, power plant, textile mills, food 
processing industries are finally fall nearby pond or Padma river through drain. Various 
parameters such as BOD, COD, EC, temperature, TDS of that water is much higher that guideline 
value. Although air pollution is no serious  in the city but presence of CH4, SO2, NO2, SPM, 
dust ,smog polluted air which found in the industrial areas, bus stations and commercial areas. 
Constructions sites are a nuisance in residential areas specifically brick crushing, cast-in-situ 
piling and power generators; automobiles workshops exceeds noise level of prescribe limit. Water, 
air and noise pollution from the improper way of installation industries deteriorates the 
environmental situation and vulnerable to various diseases. So, the concerned authority, industrial 
owner, civil society, and city dwellers as a whole should take necessary steps in controlling 
industrial pollution Rajshahi City for sound-environment.  
 
Keyword: Industrial pollution, Rajshahi city, wastewater, Padma River, silk industries. 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
The positive side is that it develops the economy of a nation and creates opportunities for huge 
number of populace. On the contrary, negative side effect is that it discharges different solid, 
liquid and gaseous wastes into the soil, sediment, water and air which are harmful to the 
neighboring population especially to the workers who are associated in the different industrial 
activities and surrounding communities who live in and around the industries. Industrial pollution 
                                                        
1Ph. D Fellow, Institute of Environmental Science, University of Rajshahi, Rajshahi, Bangladesh.  
Email: helaluddin_ies07@yahoo.com  
2M. Phil Fellow, Institute of Environmental Science, University of Rajshahi, Rajshahi, Bangladesh.  
3Ph. D Fellow, Department of Chemistry, University of Rajshahi, Rajshahi, Bangladesh. 
4Assistant Professor, Department of Food Engineering and Tea Technology, SUST, Sylhet, Bangladesh. 
 1063 
has a long term negative impact as the pollutants do not disappear immediately. But in future it 
appears in human being after decades through bioaccumulation and biomagnifications and causes 
serious health hazards. The industrial pollution also tremendous economic costs including 
degradation of ecosystem services; health-related costs; impact on economic activities such as 
agriculture, industrial production; increased water treatment costs; and reduced property values. 
Rajshahi is the 4th longest divisional head quarters and it known as an Education, Silk green City 
of Bangladesh. Although Rajshahi is not a major industrial area but industrial waste may have a 
significant effect on agricultural production where wastewater is being used. Currently, there are 
no industrial wastewater plants in Rajshahi City, though government, Environmental Society has 
made an effort to effluent by building small treatment plants. None of the company in Rajshahi 
City has treatment facilities and do not have any plan for it immediately. So, over the past years, 
the rivers of Rajshahi are experiencing more industrial waste, a practice that may need to be 
stopped. The effluent from some industries goes directly Padma river, nearby pond through drain. 
This is an inappropriate disposal method. Because these waste water contains various toxic 
substances such as heavy metals which could actually be detrimental to the plant and decrease 
efficiency. Thus, the rivers, canals, ponds have become major places for disposal of untreated 
sewage and industrial effluents, as well as urban solid waste dumping in Rajshahi. The objective 
of the study is to investigate the causes, consequences and remedial measures of industrial 
pollution in Rajshahi City. 
 
 
2. Methodology  
 
2.1. Study area 
 
Rajshahi City stands on the bank of the river Padma. The area of the Rajshahi Town is 96.69 sq 
km with a population of 772000; male 52.42%, female 47.58% (RCC website). It consists of four 
thanas, 30 wards and 169 mahallas. Rajshahi, which is both a district and a divisional town, was 
flourished, in the seventeenth century. The district head quarters were transferred to Rajshahi 
Town from Natore in 1825. Its ancient name was Rampur Boalia. The tomb of Hazrat Shah 
Makhdum (established in 1634) is located at Dargahpara of the town. Many European traders 
were attracted to this town because of its being a centre of silk production and location by the 
side of the river Padma; subsequently the Dutch, the French and the English EAST INDIA 
COMPANY established business houses in the town in phases. The head quarters of the European 
Voluntary Regiment was established in the Barakuthi during the SEPOY REVOLT in 1857. At 
the end of the nineteenth century the zamindar of Medinipur purchased the building from the 
British. After 1947 it was being used as the godown of the civil supply department. When the 
Rajshahi University was established in 1953, the Barakuthibhaban was turned into the residence 
of the Vice Chancellor with other office establishments. There are 14 graves of European persons 
in a cemetery in front of the Kuthibhaban. A flood protection embankment was established in 
1855 to save the town. Shahib Bazar is the main business centre of the town. The old areas of the 
town are Shahib Bazar, Rani Bazar, Reshampatti, Boalia, Ghoramara, Hatemkhan, Dargahpara 
and Kumarpara.  The Silk Factory Building established by the Dutch is now known as Barakuthi. 
Later the East India Company purchased the Kuthibhaban from the Dutch. A flood protection 
embankment was established in 1855 to save the town. Shahib Bazar is the main business centre 
of the town. Because of flourishing silk industry Rajshahi is also called the City of Silk. Rajshahi 
municipality was established in 1876 and was turned into a City Corporation in 1991. Rajshahi 
 1064 
City Called Education City, Silk City and Green City. Figure 1 has shown the Rajshahi City map. 
  
            
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1 Map of the study area 
 
2.2. Climate 
 
Under Koppen climate classification, Rajshahi has a tropical wet and dry climate. The climate of 
Rajshahi is generally marked with monsoons, high temperature, considerable humidity and 
moderate rainfall. The hot season commences early in March and continues till the middle of July. 
The maximum mean temperature observed is about 32 to 36 °C during the months of April, May, 
June and July and the minimum temperature recorded in January is about 7 to 16 °C (Table 1). 
The highest rainfall is observed during the months of monsoon. The annual rainfall in the district 
is about 1,448 mm (57.0 in) (BBS, 2005).  
 
Table 1 Climate in Rajshahi 
 
(Source: weaherbase.com) 
 
Main occupations of the city dwellers: Agriculture 38.73%, agricultural labourer 23.64%, wage 
labourer 3.50%, commerce 12.44%, service 8.81%, transport 2.36% and others 10.52% (RDA, 
2004). Land use of the City: Total cultivable land 157728.05 hectares; fallow land 73554.03 
hectares; single crop 22%, double crop 68% and treble crop land 10%. Cultivable land under 
irrigation is 56% (RDA, 2004). Land control: Among the peasants, 31% are landless, 47% small, 
 1065 
19% intermediate and 3% rich; cultivable land is 0.07 hectare per head (RDA, 2004). 
 
2.2. Data collection  
 
Both primary and secondary data have been collected to conduct this study. Primary data 
collected through field survey. The authors are from Rajshahi and their personal observation, 
living, and discussion with the professionals are other sources of primary data. Secondary data 
have been collected from different sources like journals, books, published documents and the 
Internet. 
 
 
3. Discussion    
 
3.1 Industries of Rajshahi City 
 
Rajshahi is not a major industrial area but is famous for its silk, and industrial wastes may have a 
significant effect on agricultural production where wastewater is being used. Approximately, 
there are 5162 industries of varying sizes in Rajshahi district (BBS, 2006). These industries are 
dominated by hand looms, rice and oil mills, and other food industries (Table 2 and Figure 2).  
 
Table 2 Various types of industries in Rajshahi (RDA, 2004) 
                                      
Type of industry No. of units 
Rubber and plastic 7 
Cotton and Spinning mill 
Cigarette Factory 
Match Factory 
Glass Factory 
Soap Factory 
Iron and Metal Factory 
Rice and oil Mills 
Handloom 
Dairy product 
Food industries 
Pharmaceutical industries 
Total 
26 
1 
8 
10 
2 
9 
1848 
973 
39 
2238 
1 
5162 
 
The industries are located throughout the district but around 32% are found within the 4 thana 
that make up the RCC area and employ over 25000 people (Figure 3). The Bangladesh Small and 
Cottage Industries Corporation (BSCIC) established an industrial estate with 325 plots in Sopura, 
on the northern edge of Rajshahi City in an area of just under 96 acres (RDA, 2004). It is 
therefore clear that Rajshahi is not a major industrial area like Dhaka, Narianganj or Gazipur but 
it is famous for its silk and it is still likely that industrial waste may have a significant effect on 
agricultural production where wastewater is being used. Two of the major industrial silk mills 
have a combined annual production capacity of 290000 yards of silk (RDA, 2004). The industry 
of Rajshahi City is categorized in two types such as: Manufactories: Silk mill, textile mill, flour 
 1066 
and rice mill, cold storage, ice factory, pharmaceuticals, press, aluminum factory, iron mill, match 
factory, jarda (scented tobacco) factory, plastic industry, metal industries, ice factory, cold storage 
and welding. Cottage industries: Rajshahi district is famous for the production of cocoon and silk 
fabrics. Silk Board has been established in Rajshahi in 1977. Other Cottage industries include 
weaving, bamboo work, cane work, goldsmith, blacksmith, potteries, brass & wood work etc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2 Category of industries in Rajshahi   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
Figure 3 locations of industries in Rajshahi 
 
In Rajshahi city area 4 thanas area are included. Of them Boalia thana area industrial activity is 
much more than other 3 thanas (Table 3). 
 
Table 3 Number of industries and industry employee in Rajshahi City (RDA, 2004) 
 
Area No. of Marco establishments Total persons employed 
Boalia 292 9802 
Matihar 
Rajpara 
Shah Makdhum 
Other 
Total for Rajshahi 
55 
186 
25 
1156 
1714 
1814 
12668 
948 
31834 
57066 
Boalia  
17%
Matihar
3%
Rajpara
11%
Shah Makdhum
1%Other
68%
Rice and oil Mills, 
19%
Handloom, 36%
Food industries, 
43%
Others, 2%
 1067 
A silk industry’s shown in the folloing figure in the Uposhahor, in Rajshahi City. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4 Silk industry in Rajshahi City 
 
3.2 Industrial Pollution in Rajshahi City  
 
Due to lack of awareness as well as the absence of strong punitive actions, the practice of 
circulating waste and effluent into water bodies including ponds, canals, creeks and rivers still 
remains widespread. Pollution is also caused when silt and other suspended solids, such as soil, 
wash off ploughed fields, construction and logging sites and eroded pond banks when it rains. 
The substances, which degrade the quality of water is called water pollutant which causes water 
pollution. Various waste origin are shown in Table 4. Pollutants are included into the water from 
various sources. The sources are usually two kinds such as natural sources and anthropogenic 
sources. Natural sources of water pollutants in the study area include soil erosion and 
decomposition of plant and animal bodies. Excessive soil erosion in the surrounding area of 
ponds and catchments area of the Padma increases the sediment load as well as turbidity of water. 
On the other hand, the anthropogenic sources of water pollution included industrial sources, 
agricultural sources and urban sources. 
 
Table 4 Origin of waste in Rajshahi City 
 
No. Category Industries 
1 Wastes of animal origin Milk dairies, fertilizer industry, glue industry, shoe 
industry, soap industry, woolen industry, woolen 
textile mills, etc. 
2 
 
3 
Wastes of minerals origin 
 
Wastes of vegetables origin 
Chemical industry, dye works, metal industry, 
water treatment plants etc 
Sugar industry, cotton textile mills, canning & 
rubber industry, paper industry, saw mills etc. 
 1068 
3.3 Consequences of Industrial Pollution in Rajshahi City 
 
Industrial pollution comprises soil, air, water and noise pollution in Rajshahi City. In RCC area 
industrial pollution is comes from stationary sources. The industrial emissions depend upon the 
nature of product, quantum of materials handled, packing, nature of process, mode of handling, 
transportation, etc. In Rajshahi City accelerated the problem of air pollution due to industrial 
activities (i.e. boiler and heating installations, engineering workshops, fertilizer manufacturing 
units, paper and pulp plants etc.). Due to excessive air pollution effects on human health, physical 
features of atmosphere and vegetation etc. Following chart has shown environmental hazards due 
to industrial pollution in the Rajshahi City.  
 
 
Surface water quality is similarly poor because untreated effluent is discharged through various 
drains into the canals and seasonal ponds, and ultimately to the agricultural fields to the north, 
affecting agriculture and posing a risk to human health. The RDA reports that the drainage from 
the city, dumping of solid waste, overflow of pit latrines and the discharge from the sugar mill are 
affecting the quality of surfacewater, causing poor rice yields in low land areas in the dry period. 
River has become a sewage discharge site for municipal wastewater and an industrial dumping 
ground for local businesses with no other means of disposal. The poor water quality of rivers of 
Padma has much economic costs associated with it, including degradation of ecosystem; health-
related costs; impact on economic activities such as agriculture, industrial production, and 
tourism; increased water treatment costs; and reduced property values. Sewage contributes 90% 
of water pollution and remaining 10% is contributed by the industrial sector. The contribution by 
industrial sector seems insignificant but it has a greater impact because it increases the heavy 
metal load in the river water. In the City, largest manufacturing industry is the silk industry. There 
are approximately, 9 iron and metal factory, 1 pharmaceutical company, 26 cotton and spinning 
mills in Rajshahi City are directly connected to the nearby drain which falls ultimately Padma.  
 1069 
They lack waste water treatment facilities and discharge their untreated waste directly into the 
open rivers of Padma. It is likely that the textile manufacturing industry may contribute 
significantly to water quality deterioration. Noise is an unwanted abrupt sound of complex 
character with an irregular period and amplitude originating from a source of non-periodic 
motion. Noise that poses the greatest threat to the human body is those with high pitch, high 
amplitude, poorest tone and longest duration. In Rajshahi City area due industrial activities noise 
is produces from indoor and outdoor of the industries. But the City Corporation Authority yet not 
takes any action of the concerned industry. No industry has been found any ETP. Wastewater of 
the jute, power plant, textile mills, food processing industries are finally fall nearby pond or 
Padma river through drain. Various parameters such as BOD, COD, temperature, TDS of that 
water is much higher that guideline value. Although air pollution is no serious in the city but 
presence of CH4, SPM, dust, smog polluted air which found in the industrial areas, bus stations 
and commercial areas. In figure 5 has shown some scenario of pollution due to industrial activity 
in Rajshahi City. Constructions sites are a nuisance in residential areas specifically brick crushing, 
cast-in-situ piling exceeds noise level of prescribe limit. 
 
  
 
 
 
  
Figure 5 Some pictures of industrial pollution in Rajshahi City 
 1070 
 
4. Conclusion    
 
Rajshahi is not a major industrial area but industrial waste may have a significant effect on 
agricultural production where wastewater is being used. There are 558 small and medium 
industry of them rubber and plastic, cotton and spinning mill, cigarette factory, match factory, 
glass factory, soap factory, iron and metal factory, rice and oil mills, handloom, dairy product, 
food industries, pharmaceutical industries. But most of the industries going on without site 
clearness certificates, Effluents Treatment Plants (ETPs) and irregular inspection of industries by 
DOE. Wastewater of the jute, power plant, textile mills, food processing industries are finally fall 
nearby pond or Padma river through drain. Various parameters such as BOD, COD, EC, 
temperature, TDS of that water is much higher that guideline value. Water, air and noise pollution 
from the improper way of installation industries deteriorates the environmental situation and 
vulnerable to various diseases in Rajshahi City, Bangladesh. So, the concerned authority, 
industrial owner, civil society, and city dwellers as a whole should take necessary steps in 
controlling industrial pollution Rajshahi City for sound-environment. 
 
5. Recommendations    
 
We have to emphasis clean technologies and not clean up technologies.  
 Prevention of industrial pollution at source 
 Encourage, develop and apply the best available practicable technical solutions 
 Ensure that the polluter pays for the pollution and control arrangements 
 Focus protection on heavily polluted areas and river stretches and 
 Involve the public, NGO’s in decision making 
These policies encourage minimization of industrial waste, promote, recycling and reuse of 
materials as well as conservation of the natural resources. As per the provisions in this policy, the 
local body, statutory authorities and public limited companies will have to make annual 
environmental statement to evaluate the effect of their policies, operations and activities on the 
environment.  
 
Acknowledgements 
 
The authors would like acknowledgement Agrist. Md. Mojibor Rahman encouragements write 
manuscript. 
 
References 
 
Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics (BBS), (2005). Economic Census 2001 and 2003: Zila Series,     
 Zila: Rajshahi, Dhaka, Bangladesh, Planning Division, Ministry of Planning, Government of the   
 People’s Republic of Bangladesh. 
Junaid and Other’s, 2004, ‘Industrial Pollution in Bangladesh’, Search in yahoo@.com. 
Rajshahi Development Authority (RDA), (2004). Rajshahi Metropolitan Development Plan    
 2004-2024, Volume-I Structure Plan and Master Plan. Prepared by RDA under the Ministry of  
 Housing and Public Works, Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh. 
Rajshahi City Corporation website: www.rcc.org.bd 
1071 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
A STUDY ON NOISE POLLUTION IN VARIOUS AREA OF DHAKA CITY  
 
 
Pramanik Biplob1, Mohammad Ahmeduzzaman2 Rohman Ashikur3, Sharmin Aktar4, Reza Selim5 
and Islam Monirul6 
 
 
ABSTRACT: In Dhaka city noise pollution is a major health hazard. In fact, due to noise 
pollution millions of people in Dhaka city are exposed to deafness. Being a burning issue this 
study is carried out to assess the noise level at selected areas in Dhaka city. Our study area mainly 
covered the various major road intersections of various area of Dhaka city, which are mainly 
residential areas, commercial areas, industrial areas and mixed areas. The noise level was 
measured with the help of a sound level meter. All data were recorded in weekdays from 8.30 am 
to 2.00 pm. The various roads covered in Airport, Mirpur, Farmgate, Bijoyshorini, Azimpur and 
TSC areas are mainly residential areas and sensitive areas. The study shows that the noise level is 
much higher than standard value. The study also found that in these areas average sound levels is 
83 dB e .g 67% higher than the standard value. In mixed areas average sound levels is 88 dB e.g 
47% higher than the standard value and in commercial areas average sound levels is 92 dB e.g 
31% higher than the standard value. The study suggested that noise can be reduced by using 
quieter vehicles, keeping streets in better repair, and using low-noise road surfaces and encourage 
car users to drive area smoothly and quietly.  
 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
In Bangladesh noise pollution (also termed as sound pollution) is a major health hazard. In fact, 
due to noise pollution millions of people in Bangladesh are exposed to a number of health risks-
from deafness to heart attack (Ahmed, 1999). On city streets noise pollution can be caused by 
hydraulic horns of vehicles, microphones and cassette players. The hydraulic horns used by buses, 
trucks and scooters in the crowded city streets are dangerous for human being. This is also how 
noise pollution in Dhaka City is affecting the hearing power of thousands of children every day. 
                                                        
1 Dept of Civil Engineering, Rajshahi University of Engineering and Technology (RUET), Rajshahi, 
biplob_pramanik02@yahoo.com. 
2 Dept of Civil Engineering, Rajshahi University of Engineering and Technology (RUET), Rajshahi, 
maz020086@gmail.com.  
3 Dept of Civil Engineering, Khulna University of Engineering and Technology (KUET), Khulna. 
4 Dept of Civil Engineering, Rajshahi University of Engineering and Technology (RUET), Rajshahi. 
engr_sharmin@yahoo.com. 
5 Dept of Civil Engineering, Dhaka University of Engineering and Technology (DUET), Gazipur 
6 Dept of Civil Engineering, Rajshahi University of Engineering and Technoogy (RUET), Rajshahi. 
1072 
 
The horns especially cause serious damage to children. 
 
Moreover, if a child below three years of age hears a horn emitting 100 dB of noise from a close 
range, he or she might lose his or her hearing power (OECD, 1995). A child's health may also be 
adversely affected by loud sounds from the radio television, cassette players and microphones 
playing instrument, the sound of mills and factories and loud noise. Moreover, it is also evidence 
that among young Americans hearing sensitivity is decreasing year by year because of exposure 
to noise, including excessively amplified music. Apart from hearing loss, such noise can cause 
lack of sleep, irritability, heartburn, indigestion, ulcers, high blood pressure, and possibly heart 
disease.  
 
According to the World Health Organization (WHO), generally 60 dB sounds can make a man 
deaf temporarily and 100 dB sounds can cause complete deafness (Papacostas and Prevedouros, 
1993). But the noise of any busy street in Dhaka has been estimated at 60 to 80 dB; with the 
sound of vehicles being 95 dB, loud speakers 90 to 100 dB, mills and factories 80 to 90 dB, 
restaurants and cinema halls 75 to 90 dB, festivals 85 to 90 dB, scooter or motorbike 87 to 92 dB 
and trucks and buses 92 to 94 dB, Though the desired sound measure is 25 dB in the bedroom, 40 
dB in the dining or drawing room, 35-40 dB in the office, 30-40 dB in the class room, 20-35 dB 
in hospital, 40-60 dB in a restaurant, and 45 dB in the city at night. Noise pollution beyond the 
limit destroys hearing and might even lead to the losses of mental balance. According to a survey 
of the Department of Environment (DOE), noise causes mental and physical illness among; the 
people. It causes high blood pressure, tachycardia, headache, indigestion, peptic ulcer, and also 
affects sound sleep (Ahmed, 1998). Working in an atmosphere of loud noise for a long period can 
cause complete deafness to any person. Any sort of noise pollution seriously affects expecting 
mothers. It has been observed that pregnant mothers living near big airports give birth to Area 
crippled, deformed and immature children than those living in other places. 
 
A survey, conducted by the Dey et al. (2002) among 2,500 people of whom 1,000 were students, 
found 97% students were disturbed by noise pollution and 60-70% experienced difficulty in 
concentration, headache and aggravation as a result of noise pollution. Out of these 2,500 people, 
69% had headache, 68% had aggravation, 49% had bad temper, 42% had problems in hearing, 
42% had irregular heartbeats and 39% had trouble sleeping. Therefore, it is necessary to control 
the noise in Bangladesh as well as all over the world by the awareness rising activity, rules and 
provising technology. However, the objective of the study was to measure noise levels at various 
areas of Dhaka city. 
 
 
2.  Methodology 
 
2.1.  Data Collection 
 
The data were collected in different areas in Dhaka city. Each day a place of the selected areas 
was covered. All the measurements were observed from 8:30 am to 2:00 pm in hoping to catch 
rush of school and office hours. The data will be collected using the Sound Level Meter which 
will give readings in decibels of sound (Figure 1). 
 
The sound level meter is used to measure sound level in decibels (dB). An output part on the 
1073 
 
meter records sound level data. A switch on the meter is used to select dB. The sound level meter 
also has an LCD panel, which allows you to use it as a stand-alone device. A dB range switch and 
a response switch provide flexibility in the standalone mode. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1 Measurements are being taken with sound level meter 
 
2.2.  Study Areas 
 
This study of the various areas was selected in Dhaka city due to their characteristics of 
residential and mixed zones. The initial area which has been selected for this study is the Airport 
Circle Road Area and Farmgate. It is a commercial area. With the standard values of the noise 
level around the Dhaka City, the study will also be focusing on the current issues and situation of 
the delicate areas such as hospitals, schools and mosque which are tremendously being affected 
by the noise pollution. The next areas are residential and sensitive Areas.  
 
3.  Results and Discussion 
 
Above these areas consists of a large number of shopping centers, offices, coaching centers and a 
variety different number of commercial activities. However, noise level of the different areas of 
Dhaka city has describes in the following section. 
 
 
3.1.  Airport Area 
 
The first data was collected from Airport Circle Road. The noise level of airport circle road at 
different time is shown in Table 1. There are Airport, Railway Station, Bus Stand, Hotel, CNG 
Station, Bazar and some residential homes are established along the road. It seems to be a very 
busy road with heavy traffic during the peak hours of office and school hours. Normally, the level 
of noise was high (above 95 dB) at 8:30 AM due to office and school time. Moreover, the 
1074 
 
comparisons of sound level (dB) with standard value at Airport area are as follows in Figure 2. 
Table 2 Measurement observed on Airport Circle Road. 
 
8:30 
AM 
9:00 
AM 
10:00 
AM 
11:00 
AM 
12:00 
PM 
1:00 
PM 
2:00 
PM 
95 101 85 89 87 88 87 
96 92 84 90 89 86 85 
       
97 94 86 106 90 89 84 
Airport Circle Road  
(Values in dB) 
94 93 88 96 91 90 85 
Average 
value 
Observed 
91 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2 Comparison of Sound Level (dB) with Standard Value at Airport area 
 
3.2.  Mirpur Area 
In Mirpur section 2 and Serabangla National Stadium Road, it has been chosen for measurement 
of sound. This area includes large number of schools, colleges, religions institutes, offices,  
 
Table 2 Measurement observed at Mirpur Section 2 Sb. N.S Road area. 
 
8: 30 
AM 
9: 00 
AM 
10:00 
AM 
11: 00 
AM 
12: 00 
PM 
1:00 
PM 
2: 00 
PM 
Average 
value 
88 87 85 88 86 90 88 Observed 
89 88 85 92 89 86 87  
86 86 87 91 91 89 89 88 
Mirpur  Section 2 
Sb. N.S Road area 
(Values in dB) 
90 84 84 93 88 91 88  
 
Airport Circle Road, 8.30AM to 2.00PM
70
84
106
91
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Standard Lowest Highest Average
So
un
d 
Le
ve
ls
 (d
B
)
1075 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3 Comparison of Sound Level (dB) with Standard Value at Mirpur area 
garments, cinema hall, theater, markets, mosques, stadium and residential areas. The figure 3 
shows the increment values when compared with standard values. Moreover, table 2 also 
indicated the noise level at different time of the days. The average value of the noise level is 88 
dB (Table 2) while the standard level of this mixed area is only 50 dB. However, noise level of 
the days showing that it is harmful and bad for us and especially for the children. 
 
3.3.  Farmgate 
 
Farmgate area is a commercial area of Dhaka city. It is a very busy place where filled with 
markets, offices, coaching centers, clinics, college, school, movie theaters, bus stands and other 
commercial activities. The figure 4 shows the increment values when compared with standard 
values. Moreover the average value of the noise level is 93 dB (Table 3) while the standard level 
of this commercial area is only 70 dB. The maximum noise level was at 10 AM with the average 
value of 96 dB. 
 
3.4.  Azimpur Area 
 
The Azimpur area has fill up by the educational institutes, student's hostel and residential houses, 
Dhaka University, BUET, EDEN College, Vicarunnesa school established along the areas. The 
figure 5 shows the increment values when compared with standard values. Moreover the average 
value of the noise level is 86 dB (Table 4) while the standard level of this mixed area is only 50 
dB. The maximum noise level was at 10 AM with the average value of 92 dB. 
 
3.5. TSC Area 
 
TSC area is considered under the residential or silent zone areas with the standard sound level of 
45 to 50 decibels. But we can see from the above graphs the average values around 79 dB which 
is too higher than the standard value (Table 5). From the figure 6, it is clear that the highest value 
is 86 dB while the lowest value is 70 dB. This huge difference in values shows how much people 
in general are suffering cause of this uncomfortable noise pollution. 
 
Mirpur-2 No. S Stadium Road, 8.00AM to 2.00PM
50
84
93 88
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Standard Lowest Highest Average
So
un
d 
Le
ve
ls
 (d
B
)
1076 
 
Table 3 Measurement observed at Farmgate Area. 
 
8:30 
AM 
9:00 
AM 
10:00 
AM 
11:00 
AM 
12:00 
PM 
1:00 
PM 
2:00 
PM 
90 89 97 104 96 91 90 
88 91 96 98 94 90 89 
92 93 98 95 93 89 88 
Framgate area 
(Values in dB) 
91 95 93 96 100 92 86 
Average 
value 
Observed 
93 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4 Comparison of Sound Level (dB) with Standard Value at Farmgate area 
 
Table 5 Measurement observed at Azimpur area. 
 
Ajimpur area (Values 
in dB) 
8:30A
M 
9:00A
M 
10:00A
M 
11:00A
M 
12:00P
M 
1:00P
M 
2:00P
M 
Average 
value 
Observed 
86 
 84 88 90 84 80 89 87  
 88 87 96 85 79 82 91  
 86 90 88 86 81 84 88  
 85 88 89 85 78 87 89  
  
 
 
 
 
Farmgate Mor, 8.30AM to 2.00PM
70
86
104
93
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Standard Lowest Highest Average
So
un
d 
Le
ve
ls
 (d
B
)
Farmgate area 8.30 AM to 2.00 PM 
1077 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5 Comparison of Sound level (dB) with standard value at Azimpur Crossing. 
 
Table 5 Measurement observed on TSC area 
              
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6 Comparison of Sound Level (dB) with Standard Value at T.S.C Circle Area. 
 
T.S.C  area  
(Values in dB) 
8:30 
AM 
9:00 
AM 
10:00 
AM 
11:00 
AM 
12:00 
PM 
1:00 
PM 
2:00 
PM 
Average 
value 
Observed 
79 
 78 88 80 82 77 73 75  
 80 86 81 78 79 70 73  
 79 82 79 80 80 76 79  
 77 80 82 81 78 74 73  
Azimpur Mor, 8.30AM to 2.00PM
50
78
96
86
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Standard Lowest Highest Average
So
un
d 
Le
ve
ls
 (d
B
)
T.S.C Circle Road, 8.30AM to 2.00PM
50
70
88
79
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Standard Lowest Highest Average
So
un
d 
Le
ve
ls
 (d
B
)
1078 
 
4. Conclusions 
 
Noise pollution is a growing concern these days, especially in the cities of Bangladesh.  
Approximately 12 million people are now living in Dhaka where traffic congestion is a regular 
phenomenon almost on every road, every lane and by-lane. Moreover, most of the English 
medium preschools, schools, and many coaching centers are located in various areas of Dhaka 
city. From this study it is observed that 
 
 In residential sensitive areas average sound levels is 83 dB e.g 67% higher than the 
standard value. 
 In mixed areas average sound levels is 88 dB e.g 47% higher than the standard value. 
 In commercial areas average sound levels is 92 dB e.g 31% higher than the standard 
value. 
 
However, the study has suggested that all the measurements were taken from 8:30 am to 2:00 pm 
during the office rush hours. But no data is available during night especially after 10.00pm. 
Similar study may be carried out at night time to see the differences in the scenario.  
 
Acknowledgements 
 
The author would like to thanks Mr Dipok Chandra Sarker (Assistant Professor, Ruet) for editing 
this manuscript. 
 
References 
 
Ahmed, F. (1999). Study on noise pollution caused by road traffic in Dhaka city. B.Sc. in Civil 
Engineering thesis, Buet, Bangladesh. 
Ahmed K (1998). A study on noise pollution in Dhaka city, Department of Environment, 
Bangladesh. 
Dey, A.R., Kabir, N. and Efroysson, D. (2002). Noise Pollution in Dhaka: Current Situation and 
Suggestions for Action. Work for a Better Bangladesh (WBB Trust Organization), Dhaka. 
OECD (1995). Road side noise abatement, road transport research, Organization for economic 
cooperation and development, publication services, OECD, Frances. 
Papacostas, C.S. and Prevedouros, P.D. (1993). Transportation engineering and planning, 2nd ed, 
Prentice Hall Publishers, USA. 
 
1079 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
ASSESSMENT OF AIR POLLUTION ASSOCIATED WITH BRICK PRODUCTION 
 
 
Pramanik Biplob1, Mohammad Ahmeduzzaman2, Reza Selim3, Akhter Sarmin4, Islam Monirul5, 
Rohman Ashikur6 and Fatima Shamsad7 
 
 
ABSTRACT: Air pollution is one of the major environmental problems now days, especially for 
developing countries such as Bangladesh and Brickfields have been identified as a vital pollutant 
source of the major cities of the country. Brickfield pollution was the main concern of this work. 
To achieve that objective, ambient pollutant concentrations were measured experimentally. Air 
sampling was done at different locations in a cluster of brickfields of 29 brick kilns in Natore 
district Singra, Gurudaspur, Lalpur, Bonpara, Mazgram. The study found that air pollution due to 
the brick making industries causing serious occupational health hazards by discharging toxic 
fumes. An experimental exercise was carried out to assess toxic fumes by brick kilns on 
surrounding environment. Gaseous pollutants included Sulfur dioxide, Carbon monoxide, and 
Hydrocarbons. Those pollutant data at different locations on different days were increased day by 
day. The experimental results helped to estimate total annual emission to visualize the total 
emission environment by the brick fields in this region. 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Air pollution associated with brick field is one of the major man made environmental problems 
that has recently gained importance among environmental issues in Bangladesh. Moreover, the 
air pollution emission from brick kilns has also gained international attention (Ferdausi et al., 
2008). So rate of emission is increasing due to the corresponding increase of brick fields. The 
guidelines for sitting and emission standards for small scale industries are not yet established by 
regulatory authority. Small scale industries are shared significant amount of pollution load among 
total emission released from other major industries. Emission from multiple brick kilns that are 
densely distributed in manufacturing villages would cause severe adverse effects to human health 
(Blackman 2000; Zhang 1997) and agricultural crops (Singh and Asgher, 2005). 
                                                        
1 Department of Civil Engineering, Rajshahi University of Engineering and Technology (RUET), Rajshahi, 
email: biplob_pramanik02@yahoo.com. 
2 Department of Civil Engineering, Rajshahi University of Engineering and Technology (RUET), Rajshahi, 
email: maz020086@gmail.com. 
3 Department of Civil Engineering, Dhaka University of Engineering and Technology (DUET), Gazipur. 
4 Department of Civil Engineering, Rajshahi University of Engineering and Technology (RUET), Rajshahi, 
email: engr_sharmin@yahoo.com.  
5 Department of Civil Engineering, Rajshahi University of Engineering and Technology (RUET), Rajshahi. 
6 Department of Civil Engineering, Khulna University of Engineering and Technology (KUET), Khulna.  
7 Department of Civil Engineering, Rajshahi University of Engineering and Technology (RUET), Rajshahi.  
1080 
 
 
Among small scale industries, the brick kiln industry is growing very firstly due to rapid 
urbanization and expansion of cities which created huge demands of building materials. Out of 
various building materials used in the country, clay bricks are most commonly used. The research 
problems are the present rate of emission GHG gases associated with the brick fields. Brick 
making significantly contributes to local air pollution including emission of harmful gases such 
as Sulphur Oxides (SOx), Nitrogen Oxides (NOx), and Carbon Monoxide (CO) and Carbon di-
oxide (CO2). This study particularly intends to trace the nature, scale and operating modes of 
unseen air pollutants. Numerous brick-making kilns operating in the dry season are one of the 
major sources of air pollution in cities. A significant factor is that brick kilns are usually clustered 
near big cites in different parts of Bangladesh. Therefore, the parts of the city in the immediate 
vicinity of the brick-field clusters have serious air pollution problems. Air pollution in Natore 
district is severally affected by the pollutants from one hundred and sixty of brickfields. These 
kilns produce bricks using an old conventional process. Every year more than 20 lakh metric tons 
of low quality coal and 20 lakh metric tons of wood are burnt in these brick fields along with tires 
and rubber. Only few fields use natural gas where it is available. The pollution is caused by the 
poor quality of fuel, improper design of chimneys and combustion chamber. Pollutants such as 
oxides of carbon, sulfur dioxide, oxides of nitrogen, volatile organic compounds and particulates 
are produced from the brickfields. Moreover even under well-controlled processes worldwide, 
0.2 microgram toxic equivalents of dioxins and furans are emitted as byproduct during the 
production of each ton of brick, which is very harmful for lives. Brickfields also cause crop loss, 
corrosion of metallic objects and loss of soil fertility. The objective of this study is to determine 
the rate of emission of GHGs in Natore district for one brick kiln and the rate of emission of 
GHGs in Natore district for one brick. Moreover, the study also reported the process of brick 
making. 
 
 
2. Methodology 
 
2.1. Field survey and data collection 
 
Firstly the study was calculated the rate of pollutant emission for one brick and also calculated 
the amount of total emission rate in the various area of Natore district. The major emission gases 
are CO, CO2, NOx, SO2, VOC, PM, N2, O2, ASH etc. The study has also collected some 
information from the manager of each brick field. Then applied a questionnaire survey was 
applied to get the information of the brick fields in Natore district. By the questionnaire survey, 
qualitative and quantitative data like amount of soil and type of soil, production capacity per day 
and season, amount and type coal, wood and brick burning processes etc has been collected from 
there. With the help of these data a life cycle assessment was made and represented this stepwise 
rate of GHG emission by this life cycle assessment 
 
2.2. Brick Making System 
 
For done the environmental assessment selected HNS brick field was taken which situated in 
Singra Thana in Natore district. To made this life cycle assessment used data is per year 
20411250 kg raw material soil, the number of brick produced are 32 lakh, the amount of coal 
required as a fuel are 750 ton, the amount of wood required 80 ton, the amount of diesel required 
1081 
 
70 ton However, soil collected is needed to make the brick firstly. Figure 1 is showing the 
collecting of soil to make a brick. 
 
 
 
Figure 1 Collecting the soil 
 
Then some water is added to the soil. For this purposes 8-16 hp machine is used. The greasy and 
non greasy soil is mixed 1.5:1 to 2.5:1. In Figure 2 water added system is shown: 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2 Water added to the raw materials 
 
For the mixing of soil digging machine is used. Before the shaping the clay soil is properly mixed 
with water by this machine and then it collected for shaping. The plasticity on the mixture 
depends on adding if water. In Figure 3 is shown the mixing system: 
 
Raw 
material 
Water 
added to 
the soil 
1082 
 
 
 
Figure 3 Mixing the raw materials with water 
 
After mixing properly, this clay soil is shaped. The standard size of this shaped is 9.5״4.50*״* 
2.75״. At this time the weight of one bricks is 4.5 kg. In Figure 4, the shaping system is shown. 
After shaping properly the brick is drying by the sun heat. After drying the weight of one brick is 
4 kg. At this time the water is removed from the soil. The drying system of soil is also shown in 
Figure 4. 
 
 
 
Figure 4 Shaping and drying of raw material a standard brick 
 
For drying of the bricks one line burnt bricks is given bottom of the furnace. Then drying bricks 
is given on the top of the burnt bricks. After properly placement of the drying bricks, the pet coke 
or wood is given in the furnace and the baking process is done 980-1030 °c. The baking system is 
shown in Figure 5. 
 
Shaping of 
bricks 
Drying of 
bricks by 
sun heat 
 
Soil 
mixing 
machine 
1083 
 
 
 
Figure 5 Bricks Pattern for burning 
 
After competed this baking system this bricks is collected and distribute to the user. Some bricks 
are broken at the time of the distribution and storage time. This broken bricks is used as a khoa. 
Some brick kilns is used to wood, some brick kilns is used to coal, some brick kilns is used to 
both coal and wood (Figure 6, 7) 
 
 
 
Figure 6 Wood used as a fuel in brick industries 
Bricks 
Pattern for 
burning 
1084 
 
 
 
Figure 7 Coal used as a fuel in brick industries 
 
For flowing the smoke by the baking processes of bricks a chimney is used. In major cases, 
chimney is situated at middle portion of the brick fields (Figure 8). 
 
 
 
Figure 8 Brick kiln industry 
 
3. Results And Discussion 
 
Considerable variations of all measured parameters during brick kiln industry were observed here. 
The approximate amounts of various gases emitted are CO2, CO, SO2, NOx, N2, O2, PM, VOC 
and ASH is 24.34%, 0.0009%, 0.25%, 0.03% 71.52%, 3.8%, 0.0002%, 0.06% and 0.0002% 
respectively (Figure 9). Moreover it has been found the amount of Nitrogen is the most but 
1085 
 
apparently less than the standard. Furthermore, it is to be mentioned that there is very less amount 
of CO and PM which is due to the effect of brick kiln. There is also presence of ASH in the air of 
that area and the amount of CO2 is considerably high. Presence of SO2 has also been found for 
the burning of raw materials in that area. 
 
% of various gases emission
CO2=24.34%
CO=0.0009%
SO2=0.25%
NOX=0.03%
N2=71.52%
O2=3.8%
PM=0.0002%
VOC=0.06%
ASH=0.0002%
 
 
Figure 9 Percentage of various gases emission 
 
The percentages of emission of different gasses from different surveyed area have been also 
classified.  
%of area wise  emission  
Godora=26.13%
Kandaveta=12.14%
Majgram=27.27%
Jaruhat=11.63%
Koygarekesno=8.05%
Ahmedpur=0%
Ponditgram=14.79%
Figure 10 Percentage of emission at each survey area 
 
1086 
 
The percentages of emission of total surveyed area of Natore district in Godora, Kandaveta, 
Majgram, Jaruhat, Koygarekesno, Ahmedpur, Ponditgram are 26.13%, 12.14%, 27.27%, 11.63%, 
8.05%, 0% and 14.79% respectively (Figure 10). 
 
Furthermore it has been seen that in Majgram and Godora the amount of emission of gasses is 
most because of the presence of more brick kilns into that area. Moreover absence of any type of 
gas emission has been noticed since there is no brick kiln into that area and surprisingly there is 
even no effect of other kiln emission which is adjacent to that area.  
 
4. Conclusion 
 
Pollution is the introduction of contaminants into an environment that causes instability, disorder, 
harm or discomfort to the ecosystem i.e. physical systems or living organisms. As a result of 
increasing the brick kilns, the amount of GHGs are increasing day by day and its consequent 
effect on the plant growth, climate changes, ultraviolet radiation, Sea level rise etc. So it is caused 
air pollution to the environment. This pollutants gas has also direct effect on the human body. The 
approximate amounts of various gases emitted are CO2, CO, SO2, NOx, N2, O2, PM, VOC and 
ASH is 24.34%, 0.0009%, 0.25%, 0.03% 71.52%, 3.8%, 0.0002%, 0.06% and 0.0002% 
respectively. Moreover, the percentages of emission of total surveyed area of Natore district in 
Godora, Kandaveta, Majgram, Jaruhat, Koygarekesno, Ahmedpur, Ponditgram are 26.13%, 
12.14%, 27.27%, 11.63%, 8.05%, 0% and 14.79% respectively. From this data it is shown that 
the air is polluted by the brick kiln. If brick kiln is the important role for economic development, 
so must be it needed to reduce the emission rate by making a modern technology in brick field. 
 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
The authors would like to thanks Manager of each brick field in Natore district for proving some 
important information to write this manuscript. 
 
 
References 
 
Blackman, A. (2000). Informal sector pollution control: What policy options do we have? World 
Development, 28(12): 2067–2082. 
Zhang, Z. (1997). Energy efficiency and environmental pollution of brick making in China. 
Energy, 22(1): 33–42. 
Singh, A.L. and Asgher, M.S. (2005). Impact of brick kilns on land use/land cover changes 
around Aligarh city, India. The Journal of Habitat International, 29: 591–602. 
Ferdausi, S.A., Vaideeswaran, S. and Akbar, S. (2008). Greening brick making industries in 
Bangladesh. Presentations at the Better Air Quality Conference, Nov. 12–14, 2008, Bangkok, 
Thailand. 
1087 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
EVALUATION OF WATER SUPPLY AND SANITATION FACILITIES IN RAJSHAHI 
CITY 
 
 
Pramanik Biplob1 and Mohammad Ahmeduzzaman2 
 
 
ABSTRACT: Sanitation is the practical science of hygiene which involves the proper drainage 
of wastewater and disposal of human wastes. Sanitation can contribute greatly by preventing the 
spread of infectious diseases through transmission of disease causing agents, as in the case when 
pathogenic organisms from the excreta of an infectious person are transmitted to a healthy person. 
But, a sanitation facility of Rajshahi is not very much developed. However, the study areas 
investigate the sanitation facilities for the Ward No. 28, 29 and 30 among 30 wards of Rajshahi 
City Corporation. During this study period, a questionnaire survey form was used to interview 
them with the parameters of education, occupation, family number, monthly income, mode of 
defecation, habit of using soap, satisfaction of water supply facilities, way of waste disposal, 
common disease etc. Total 100 house owner’s interview data has been included in this study. The 
investigation shows that in the ward 28 about 90% people are literate, in the ward 29 about 75-
80% people are literate and in ward 30 about 65% people are literate. It is also investigated that 
people of those ward are using 43% of septic tank, 35% of VIP, 9% of low cost pit latrine, 7% of 
open defecation with others. The general perceptions of people on water supply facilities are 
found very bad. About 39% of the users positive comment whereas 52% expressed their no 
comment towards this supply. Moreover, peoples are facing several disease with the 54% of 
waterborne, 30% of contagious, others of 16%. Furthermore the people should be aware, 
educated and concerned about proper sanitation which will make their life livable and healthful 
by the different awareness rising program. 
 
1.  Introduction 
 
Urbanization and industrialization has been the key of development for all the countries being 
developed. Certainly the amount of production of waste is also increasing due to rapid 
urbanization and industrialization. If the wastes cannot be managed properly it may be 
detrimental for the civilization. Although the awareness of environmental degradation has been 
one of the burning issues recently discussed but has not yet very prevalent in developing 
countries like Bangladesh. Moreover, the global health burden associated with these conditions is 
staggering, with an estimated 4000–6000 children dying each day from diseases associated with 
lack of access to safe drinking water, inadequate sanitation and poor hygiene (Moe and 
                                                        
1 Department of Civil Engineering, Rajshahi University of Engineering and Technology (RUET), Rajshahi, 
biplob_pramanik02@yahoo.com 
2 Department of Civil Engineering, Rajshahi University of Engineering and Technology (RUET), Rajshahi, 
maz060086@gmail.com 
1088 
 
Rheingans, 2006; Biplob et al., 2011).The problem is very real and it is needed to take necessary 
steps to manage the waste to have a safe and healthful future.  
   The major problem for developing country whose infrastructure is not so rich is the 
management and disposal of human waste. However, Bangladesh produces 17 million metric tons 
of human faeces and 57 million metric tons of urine each year (Pramanik, 2009; Biplob et al., 
2011a). The potential dangers of human wastes have been realized for many years in 
industrialized countries through experiences from the spreading of infectious diseases at 
uncountable rates. Human faces are dangerous to health and detrimental to the environment if 
they are untreated before being disposed of into the environment. 
   Sanitation is the healthful practice or the practical science of hygiene which involves the 
proper drainage of wastewater and disposal of human wastes. Sanitation can contribute greatly by 
preventing the spread of infectious diseases through transmission of disease causing agents, as in 
the case when pathogenic organisms from the excreta of an infectious person are transmitted to a 
healthy person. Currently, UNICEF and WHO estimate that 1.1 billion people lack access to 
improved water supplies and 2.6 billion people lack adequate sanitation (UNICEF, 2004). For the 
improvement of sanitation it is needed to improve the factors affects the degree of sanitation i.e. 
water supply, health education, awareness, user participation, technology etc. 
   The study has investigated the facilities of the ward of 28, 29 and 30 in Rajshahi City 
Corporation. The community consists of the group of people living in one geographical area 
having similar approach of leading life. However, in a developing country like Bangladesh there 
is very few who actually realize the problem and the hazard of improper sanitation. A large 
number of people even don’t have any idea about the aspect of human life i.e. sanitation. Rest 
number of people knows about the thing very little and they hardly practice it. There has been 
information gap between the people living in this country. That is why there seems to be a very 
little awareness, practice and the response of the issue. 
 
2.  Methodology 
 
The methodology of this survey consists of practical field observation and field based data 
collection of water supply, sanitation and solid waste management situation through structured 
and non-structured questionnaire and formal and non-formal interviews. The relevant secondary 
data for this study was collected from published and unpublished sources. The survey was, 
therefore, undertaken to explore the nature and many other habitation problem and different 
reason of environmental hazardous situation of water supply, sanitation and solid waste 
management system in Rajshahi City. 
 
2.1. Data Collection 
 
A study was undertaken to assess the environmental conditions e.g. water supply, sanitation and 
solid waste management etc of 28, 29 and 30 among 30 wards of Rajshahi City Corporation, and 
to identify the deficiencies for the improvement of existing situation. In order to achieve the 
objectives a comprehensive literature review, household surveys and field visits, and a 
questionnaire survey were conducted. ‘Household head’ means the person who plays the main 
role in the decision-making process of a family. In absence of the household head, the second-
important adult member of the family was interviewed. A questionnaire survey was also 
conducted upon 100 respondents (selected randomly) of the ward of 28, 29 and 30. These wards 
have been shown in Figure 1. 
1089 
 
  
 
Figure 1 Map of ward 28, 29 and 30 (Rajshahi City) 
2.2. Survey Form 
It is observed from the surveys that water supply situation in the study areas are not satisfactory. 
Moreover, the other services like sanitation, drainage and waste disposal are not adequate and 
needs improvement in those areas. However, the questionnaire survey forms has the information 
of occupation, income level (monthly), family members, house ownership, responsibility of 
sanitation, satisfaction, practice of sanitation, satisfaction, satisfaction in water supply, habit of 
using soap, sweeping/ cleaning of house, way of exit of waste, how much will you spend for the 
purpose of sanitation, generally affected diseases in your family, frequency of toilet cleansing etc. 
 
3.  Results and Discussion 
 
It is observed from the questionnaire surveys that water supply situation in the study areas are not 
satisfactory. Moreover, the other services like sanitation, drainage and waste disposal are not 
adequate and needs improvement in most of the low cost areas and slums. 
 
3.1.  Education 
The investigation shows that in the ward 28 about 90% people are literate, in the ward 29 about 
80% people are literate and in ward 30 about 65% people are literate. It is an approximate 
assessment after the survey (Figure 2). 
 
3.2.  Monthly income of people 
Income level of the people living in this area is very low. Thought out the survey 32% of people 
say’s around below 5000 TK. And 30% of people are getting approximately TK.5000-10000 
(Figure 3) per month. Moreover, 23% peoples are earning 10000-20000 TK. To this survey it is 
found out that people living those area are generally poor, their occupation & monthly income 
1090 
 
can’t fulfils their fundamental needs.  Their expectation is more about getting more and more 
facility for ease of their survival. The people of these region have a moderate income level of 
about 8000-14000 BDT on average on the perspective of Bangladesh. 
 
 
 
Figure 2 Literate percentage of the ward no of 28, 29 and 30 
 
32%
30%
23%
15%
Income Level of House Owners
<5000 BDT
5000-10000 BDT
10000-20000 BDT
>20000 BDT
 
Figure 3 Income levels of house owners 
3.3.  Mode of defecation 
 
Sanitation situation is worse than water supply in the low cost areas. The commonly available 
sanitation facilities include pit latrines and water seal latrines in that area in Rajshahi City 
Corporation. Here result obtained about mode of defecation for open defecation and unhygienic 
hanging latrines are 7% and 6% respectively in the ward of 28, 29 and 30. Moreover, low cost 
simple pit latrine of 9%, VIP of 35% and septic tank system of 43% in those areas. So it is 
observed that the sanitation process for this event is found comparatively unsatisfactory for the 
ward of 28, 29 and 30 at Rajshahi City Corporation. Collated Data is shown in the Figure 4. It is 
also observed that children are generally used the yard and the places near the tube-wells for 
defecating.  
 
1091 
 
7% 6%
9%
35%
43%
0%
Practice of Sanitation
Open defication
Unhygenic hanging 
latrine
Low cost simple pit 
latrine
VIP
 
Figure 4 Practice of sanitation 
However, considering the water use facility at or near the latrines and overall hygienic condition 
of the latrines, the situation is very disappointing. The situation analysis of the areas has pit 
latrines or sanitation and it block given by different source. So, the sanitation facilities of those 
ward of Rajshahi City Corporation is not sufficient.. 
 
3.4. Water Supply 
The peoples of the wards of 28, 29 and 30 at Rajshahi City Corporation are not satisfied for the 
lack of proper water supply. Approximately, 52% respondents are not satisfied, 39% are satisfied 
while 9% have no comment for the availability of water source in that ward (Figure 5). 
 
39%
52%
9%
Satisfaction in water supply
Yes
No
No comment
 
Figure 5 Satisfaction in water supply 
3.6 Habit of using soap 
Health and hygienic facilities of the ward of 28, 29 and 30 at Rajshahi City Corporation area is in 
the worst condition. Therefore, different diseases frequently occur in that area. Besides safe 
1092 
 
distance between water point and latrine is not maintained in most cases that are very harmful for 
human health. However, in case of analyzing habit of using soap we get yes comment of 87% and 
no comment of 13% in those areas. So it is observed that the all of people are not aware about the 
health and hygiene (Figure 6). 
87%
13%
Habit of Using Soap
Yes
No
 
     Figure 6 Habit of using soap 
3.7 Solid Waste Disposal 
Food waste, paper, rubbish, ashes and residues, special wastes such as street sweeping, roadside 
litter and abandoned vehicles are the main solid wastes in the study area. Some municipal 
dustbins are found in those areas for solid waste disposal, but not sufficient and the inhabitants 
have to dispose solid wastes in open spaces and road sides that are very vulnerable for the 
deterioration of environment. Almost 37% respondents are throughout their solid waste to direct 
drain, 43% respondents are throughout to septic tank and 20% of the respondents are throughout 
by the other way for the solid waste management in the ward of 28, 29 and 30 (Figure 7). Finally 
it is concluded that people are not satisfied with the existing solid waste disposing system.  
There is house-to-house waste collection system by which the waste is disposed off both at RCC 
communal bins and open spaces (at roadside). Moreover, solid wastes are collected by bans and 
the trucks waiting outside at the main road again collect the waste disposals from the vans. Some 
wastes are also put into the garbage bins of RCC. Solid waste disposing system of the ward of 28, 
 
Figure 7 Way of exit of waste 
1093 
 
29 and 30 at Rajshahi City Corporation area very low poor as a result the environmental is 
hazardous. 
 
3.8 Paying for using latrine facilities: 
The study also investigated that the mentality of paying for using latrine facilities of the ward of 
28, 29 and 30 at Rajshahi City Corporation. Almost 77% respondents are interest to pay little bit 
money  (below 500 TK) to get safe latrine and 17% respondents are interest to pay only 500-
1000 TK while only 6% respondents are interests to pay more than 1000 TK to take safe latrine 
by the paying of money (Figure 8). After all, it is observed that most of the people have not to 
pay for using sanitation facilities due to lack to awareness on safe sanitation and their health as 
well as their poor economical status. 
77%
17%
6%
Ability to Spend for Sanitation
<500 BDT
500-1000 BDT
>1000 BDT
 
   Figure 8 Ability to spend for sanitation 
3.9 Common Diseases 
There is almost universal knowledge among adult women, adult man and young generation from 
all contexts that contaminated water can cause diarrhea or Cholera. However, the Data was 
collected from different sources and persons for common water borne diseases and contagious 
diseases in those areas. Here we observed that major people affected by the water borne diseases 
(54%) while 30% are affected by the contagious diseases (Figure 9). The respondents seem to 
have fair knowledge on the mode of transmitting germs from human excreta. Hands and nails, 
flies were mentioned the most followed by breathe or air. More proportion of the young 
generation failed to respond. 
   However, sickness during past three months from water borne diseases constituted maximum 
of all diseases reported. Maximum of the total medical expenses were spent on water related 
diseases. Most of the households reporting to have at least one sick person in their households 
during last three months were asked about loss of working days.  
 
4. Conclusions 
 
Sanitation is the healthful practice or the practical science of hygiene which involves the proper 
drainage of wastewater and disposal of human wastes. However, the study has foused on 
sanitation system of the ward of 28, 29 and 30 in Rajshahi City Corporation. The people of these 
region have a moderate income level of about 8000-14000 BDT on average and it cannot fulfill 
their fundamental needs.  It is also obtained thatof defecation for open defecation and unhygienic 
1094 
 
 
Figure 9 Common diseases by which family members are being affected 
hanging latrines are 7% and 6% respectively in the ward of 28, 29 and 30. Moreover, people are 
not satisfied with the existing solid waste disposing system. Almost 37% respondents are 
throughout their solid waste to direct drain, 43% respondents are throughout to septic tank and 
20% of the respondents are throughout by the other way for the solid waste management in the 
ward of 28, 29 and 30. The study also investigated that the mentality of paying for using latrine 
facilities of the ward is very unsatisfactory. Furthermore, the study observed that major people 
affected by the water borne diseases (54%) including diarrhea, cholera, typhoid etc while 30% are 
affected by the contagious diseases. Therefore, GO, NGOs, donor’ and policy maker should also 
step forward to help the people for this type of community participation. Furthermore the people 
should be aware, educated and concerned about all these things which will make their life livable 
and healthful. 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
The authors would like to thanks Md Azahar Ali Pramanik to provide valuable suggestion to 
write this manuscript. 
 
References 
 
Biplob, P., Sarker, D.C. and Sarker, R.C. (2011). Assessment of Water Supply and Sanitation 
Facilities for Korail Slum in Dhaka City. International Journal of Civil & Environmental 
Engineering, 11(5): 115-128. 
Biplob, P., Sarker, R.C. and Sarker, D.C. (2011a). Eco-san Toilet for Sustainable Sanitation 
Practice in Bangladesh. International Journal of Civil & Environmental Engineering, 11(5): 
139-147. 
Pramanik, M.A.A. (2009). Ecosan toilets for sustainable in Bangladesh-an experience of SPACE. 
Proceeding of the International Conference on Sustainable Development for Water and Waste 
Water Treatment, December 14-15, Yogyakarta, Indonesia. 
Moe, C.L. and Rheingans ,R.D. (2006). Global challenges in water, sanitation and health. Journal 
of water and health, 4.suppl, 41-57. 
UNICEF (2004). Meeting the MDG Drinking Water and Sanitation Target. A Midterm 
Assessment of Progress. UNICEF/WHO, Geneva, Switzerland. 
1095 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
WATER QUALITY ANALYSIS IN DIFFERENT STAGES OF SAIDABAD WATER 
TREATMENT PLANT 
 
 
Pramanik Biplob1, Mohammad Ahmeduzzaman2 and Reza Selim3 
 
 
ABSTRACT: The water quality data collected from Saidabad Wastewater Treatment Plant 
(SWTP) for the year 2010 was analyzed for the parameters pH, turbidity, color, TDS, ammonia, 
nitrate, total coliform and fecal coliform. The data obtained from the laboratory investigation 
were analyzed to assess the effectiveness of different–stages of treatment in SWTP. From the 
graphical representation of the results of laboratory test it can be seen that the raw water pH was 
7.38. As a result a reduced value of pH (7.02) can be observed at the clarified water sample. The 
analysis of water after filtration shows that the value of pH has increased to 7.15. This is because 
of the fact that no chlorination was done in between clarifier and filter. This again reduced the pH 
value and it dropped to 7.05 for treated water. Moreover, after clarification the turbidity of water 
became 6.03 NTU i.e. 60% of the turbidity has been reduced, though this process is supposed to 
remove more than 80% of turbidity. As the water went through the chlorination process, mixing 
chamber and get mixed with alum and coagulation process takes place, most of the color got 
remove reducing the color content to 19 TCU. After filtration it is further reduced to 8 TCU, 
which finally became 6 TCU in the treated water. The concentration of Nitrate (NO3) in raw, 
clarified, filtered and treated water was 2.2 mg/1, 1.1 mg/1, 0.9 mg/1 and 2.1 respectively. The 
allowable concentration of nitrate in water is 50 mg/1. In the collected raw water sample presence 
of both Total and Fecal Coliform can be observed. But in the clarified water the Total Coliform 
and fecal coliform content is seen to be nil. This means the chlorination of the disinfection 
process was efficient enough to remove the coliforms, thus it indicates the probability of the 
water being sufficiently treated and destruction of various pathogens. To guarantee the removal of 
ammonia and other organic matter up to desired level, special treatment processes or separate 
ammonia treatment plant is needed to be established. 
 
 
1.  Introduction 
 
Ammonia, nitrate, turbidity, coli form, color etc are the major pollution sources that contribute to 
environmental quality problems all over the world, especially those that mainly cater for 
                                                        
1 Department of Civil Engineering, Rajshahi University of Engineering and Technology (RUET), Rajshahi, 
biplob_pramanik02@yahoo.com 
2 Department of Civil Engineering, Rajshahi University of Engineering and Technology (RUET), Rajshahi, 
maz060086@gmail.com 
3 Department of Civil Engineering, Dhaka University of Engineering and Technology (DUET), Dhaka. 
1096 
 
treatment of wastewater. The most adverse environmental impacts associated with improper 
discharge of municipal wastewater having significant amounts of organic matter (COD), nitrogen 
(N) and phosphorus (P) include promotion of eutrophication, toxicity to aquatic organisms and 
depletion of dissolved oxygen to receiving streams (Gupta & Gupta 1997; Klees & Silverstein 
1992; Moosavi et al., 2005) which kills fish. An estimated 80% of all diseases are water-related 
which includes cholera, typhoid, dysentery, hepatitis killing millions all over the world. Even 
cancer, birth defects, central nervous system disorders, disruption of endocrine system, heart 
diseases can be associated with polluted water consumption. High nitrate concentration in 
drinking water may cause serious problems in humans and animals (Darimont 1988; Nugent et al., 
1988). Due to the adverse impacts, complete treatment of municipal wastewater before discharge 
has been increasingly needed. In our increasingly urbanized and industrialized society with a 
rapidly expanding world population, the need for cost-effective and environmentally sound 
technologies for wastewater treatment is required to improve the quality of the environment.  
However, water is the most basic resource for human survival, indispensable for human health 
and well-being; in fact, the human body is composed of 70% water. Providing water, safe for 
drinking and other purposes is essential for live and is one of the most important goals for 
development.Inconsiderate dumping of untreated domestic and industrial wastes into surface 
water bodies ground Dhaka is worsening the water supply condition of the city. Hence, properly 
treated surface water is probably the only option open for this city and Saidabad Water Treatment 
Plant is working on this purpose. Saidabad Water Treatment Plant is a conventional surface water 
treatment plant with the river Sitalakhya as its source. It is the largest water treatment plant in 
Bangladesh and is supplying almost 225 MLD water. But sadly the source is subjected to high 
degree of pollution and the quality of the intake water is deteriorating with time. Different 
treatment processes, such as, pre-chlorination, coagulation, filtration, disinfection and pH 
correction are used at SWTP. Understanding the acuteness of the situation an extensive study was 
carried out on the effect of these treatment processes on the water quality parameters to evaluate 
the efficiency of the treatment plant. The main objective of the research is to determine the effect 
of different treatment options by assessing water quality at source, after clarification, filtration 
and final treatment. 
 
 
2.  Methodology 
  
For proper evaluation clear understanding of the treatment processes is necessary along with 
extensive water quality data. The study involves some parameters i,e pH, turbidity, color, TDS, 
ammonia, nitrate, total coliform and fecal coliform of water quality. These parameters can give 
general assessment of physical, chemical and microbiological quality of water.  
 
2.1.  Data Collection 
 
Water samples at different stages of treatment i.e. raw water, clarified water, filtered water and 
treated water were done from the SWTP for the study. The sample collection was done from four 
sampling points. The sampling point for raw water is the point where water leaves the 
convergence canal (DND) and before it gets into the raw water pumping station. The second 
sample which is for clarified water was taken from the point where water leaves the clarification 
system. After the water passes through the coagulation process then the filtered water sample was 
1097 
 
taken. The last sample, which is of treated water, was taken after the water completes the 
treatment process and leaves the clear water reservoir to move on to the treated water pumping 
station. 
 
 
2.2.  Treatment Process 
 
The treatment processes of the SWTP are as follows in the figure 1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure1 Flow Chat of Saidabad wastewater treatment system (SWTP) 
 
Raw Water Pumping Satation  
at 
Shitalakhya River 
Intake 
Raw Water Pumping Station 
 
DND Canal 
To Distribution System 
Treated Water Pumping Sation 
Clean Water Reservoir 
   Filtration 
      Clarification 
      Mixing Chamber  Cl, Alum, Lime 
Lime, Post Chlorination 
Backwash Water to Sludge Lagon 
Alum Sludge to Sludge Lagoon 
1098 
 
2.3.  Analysis Parameters 
 
To find the requisite water quality parameters, Laboratory tests were done on collected water 
samples at the Saidabad Water Treatment Plant laboratory which is facilitated with all the 
necessary equipment as water quality tests are regularly done for the maintenance of the plant. 
The tests were performed on samples of raw water, clarified water, filtered water and treated 
water and the tested parameters were, pH, turbidity, color, total dissolved solids, ammonia, nitrate, 
total coliform and fecal coliform. Amongst the seven days on which laboratory test were done 
only one day’s have been chosen for detailed analysis here. 
 
 
3.  Results And Discussion 
 
The water quality data collected from SWTP for the year 2010 was analyzed for the parameters 
pH, turbidity, color, TDS, ammonia, nitrate, total coliform and fecal coliform. The performance 
of the plant regarding the limiting or removal of these parameters was assessed in raw and treated 
water. Besides this, the data obtained from the laboratory investigation were analyzed to assess 
the effectiveness of different–stages of treatment in SWTP. Data of different years were 
compared to get a general idea of the trend of raw water quality and treatment efficiency 
throughout the study year. 
 
3.1.  Water Quality Analysis in different stages of treatment Plant 
 
The laboratory tests were conducted on water samples of raw water, clarified water, filtered, and 
treated water stages of treatment plant.  Amongst the seven days on which laboratory test were 
done only one day’s have been chosen for detailed analysis here. 
 
3.1.1.  pH 
From the graphical representation of the results of laboratory test it can be seen that the raw water 
pH was 7.38 (Figure 2). This raw water is pumped and chlorination is done for disinfection. 
Afterwards water goes though the mixing chamber where Ca (OH)2 and alum are added. As a 
result a reduced value of pH (7.02) can be observed at the clarified water sample. The Analysis of 
water after filtration shows that the value of pH has increased to 7.15. This is because of the fact 
that no chlorination was done in between clarifier and filter. Before the water gets to the clear 
water reservoir, post chlorination and pH correction is done. This again reduced the pH value and 
it dropped to 7.05 for treated water. 
 
Before this treated water moves to the distribution network it is necessary that the pH is further 
increased to increase Alkalinity. This is done because alkaline water is easier to transport. And if 
pH goes low to acidic range it can cause corrosion to the metal pipes used for transporting water. 
For that pH correction is required. But as turbidity of water is high this process is not possible 
here as using Ca(OH)2 for pH correction will enhance turbidity. According to WHO guidelines 
for safe drinking water, the pH has to be within the range of 6.5-8.5 (WHO, 1993). The treated 
water respected the standard. 
1099 
 
 
Figure 2 pH variation in different stages of treatment plant 
3.1.2. Turbidity 
The laboratory test data shows that the turbidity of the raw water sample is 15.1 NTU, 
which is not as high as it is expected to be during this season. This turbidity is probabl
y due to pollution of water, as the presence of colloidal particles would have increased t
he turbidity to a much higher value. Due to pollution of water ammonia i.e. organic con
centration in water increases increasing the algae production, which in turn increases turbi
dity. This type of turbidity is difficult to remove. After disinfection and going through th
e mixing chamber, when the water enters the clarifier the heavy particulate matter tends t
o settle on the bottom of the clarifier, as a result the turbidity decreases. Here, after clari
fication the turbidity of water became 6.03 NTU i.e. 60% of the turbidity has been reduc
ed, though this process is supposed to remove more than 80% of turbidity (Figure 3) Aft
er clarification the water goes into the filter and filtration process further reduces the turb
idity to a value of 4.21 NTU; i.e. 12% turbidity was removed in this process. This value
is acceptable per the WHO guidelines and Bangladesh Standards of 5 NTU. However the
treated water turbidity is slightly higher and is 4.44 NTU (Figure 3).  
 
 
Figure 3 Turbidity variations in different stages of treatment plant 
The reason behind this is the difference in behavior of different filters, as multiple filters  
are used. To further improve the turbidity coagulant like different types of polymer can be
used on test basis at the laboratory. 
 
3.1.3.  Color 
The Color content in Raw water is high (55 TCU). This color is possibly due to humic and fulvic 
acids. As the water went through the chlorination process, mixing chamber and get mixed with 
1100 
 
alum and coagulation process takes place, most of the color got remove reducing the color 
content to 19 TCU (Figure 4). After filtration it is further reduced to 8 TCU, which finally 
became 6 TCU in the treated water. The Color content in the Treated water meets the WHO 
standard of 15 TCU (WHO, 1993). So this is acceptable. 
 
This is noticeable here that the water has gone through Chlorination process. Although it reduces 
color, color being organic in nature has a risk of producing Trihalomethanes (THMs) reacting 
with chlorine. Therefore, Chlorinated Ferrous Sulphate, Ozone or Membrane processes can be 
recommended for safe removal of color. 
 
 
Figure 4 Color variations in different stages of treatment plant 
3.1.4.  Total Dissolved Solids  
The Total Dissolved Solids (TDS) contents in raw, clarified, filtered and treated water are 445 
mg/1, 448 mg/ and 446 mg/1 respectively i.e. the values remained almost the same throughout 
the process of treatment (Figure 5). This TDS comprise of inorganic salts and small amount of 
organic matter that is dissolved in water. In raw water, it possibly originated from natural sources, 
sewage, urban runoff and industrial wastewater. These values are well within the acceptable limit 
of 1000 mg/1 (WHO, 1993). TDS is not of health concern, though high concentration of TDS 
unacceptable as well because of its flat, insipid taste. 
 
 
Figure 5 Total Dissolved Solids variation in different stages of treatment plant 
3.1.5.  Ammonia 
From the laboratory test of the collected water samples it was seen that the ammonia content in 
raw water is 4.85 mg/1, in clarified water 4.7 mg/1, in filtered water 4.05 mg/1 and in treated 
water it is 4.1 mg/1 (Figure 6). The high value of ammonia in raw water is due to pollution of the 
1101 
 
source water body by various municipal and industrial waste discharges. As water went through 
the treatment process the concentration of ammonia is only slightly reduced. However, high 
concentration of ammonia in water helps in rapid and extensive growth of algae, causing turbidity, 
color and odor problems. The WHO guidelines suggest that the ammonia content in drinking 
water should not exceed 1.5 mg/1 limit (WHO, 1993). In this case, the ammonia concentration is 
seen to be way above the allowable limit in treated water. This indicates that the treatment 
process was not sufficient for the removal of ammonia. 
 
To reduce this high level of ammonia, additional ammonia removal unit is required. For removal 
of ammonia, “Break-point chlorination” is the most usual method, where ammonia is completely 
oxidized to nitrogen leaving residual of free chlorine. Ammonia can also be removed by 
biological method of nitrification. But in this case nitrate is formed which increases the nitrate 
concentration in drinking water. 
 
 
Figure 6 Ammonia variations in different stages of treatment plant 
3.1.6.  Nitrate  
The concentration of nitrate (NO3) in raw, clarified, filtered and treated water was 2.2 mg/1, 1.1 
mg/1, 0.9 mg/1 and 2.1 respectively (Figure 7). The allowable concentration of nitrate in water is 
50 mg/1. As here even in the raw water the concentration is so small, the removal of nitrate is the 
least of the concerns. The slight decrease and the increase in the concentration are due to the 
chemical actions in the treatment process. 
 
 
Figure 7 Nitrate variations in different stages of treatment plant 
1102 
 
3.1.7.  Total Coliform and Fecal Coliform 
Though the Coliform Bacteria itself is not pathogenic, it indicates the presence of pathogens. 
Fecal Coliform indicates pollution of water by fecal contamination. In the collected raw water 
sample presence of both Total and Fecal Coliform can be observed. The reason is the pollution of 
the water source. As the source is a river which constantly accepts municipal and industrial 
discharges, naturally it contains pathogens and other bacteria. In the raw water sample the Total 
Coliform content is 6000 CFU/1OOml (Figure 8). From this it can be understood that almost half 
of the coliform are of non-fecal tages of treatment have shown fluctuation.  
 
In the clarified water the Total Coliform Content is seen to be nil. This means the chlorination of 
the disinfection process was efficient enough to remove the coliforms, thus it indicates the 
probability of the water being sufficiently treated and destruction of various pathogens. The Total 
Coliform Content remained nil through the rest of the treatment process hence the treated water 
was free from coliforms. It indicates that the water is free from fecal contamination hence free 
from pathogens. As both Total and Fecal Coliform content is 0 CFU/1OOml here, the treated 
water met the WHO guideline (WHO, 1993). It means the treated water is free from pathogens 
thus suitable for drinking. 
 
 
Figure 8 Total Coliform and Fecal Coliform in different stages of treatment plant 
 
4.  Conclusions  
 
The target of the research was to evaluate the performance of the Saidabad Water Treatment Plant 
based on selected parameters which were pH, turbidity, color, TDS, ammonia, nitrate, total 
coliform and fecal coliform. The goals were to assess whether the treatment processes used are 
efficient enough to treat the water to meet the guideline values and which component of the 
treatment plays the most important role in the process of treating surface water from Shitalakhya 
River. Hence, complete water quality data on selected parameters were collected different 
treatment stages. From the analysis of these data the following conclusions can be drawn: 
 
 The plant is effective in keeping the turbidity within the guideline value throughout the 
year at both high and low concentrations. Almost 90% of the turbidity is removed after 
the completion of clarification alone. 
 The treatment process in successful in keeping the color content within the guideline 
1103 
 
value. The process is efficient in regulating pH level required for various treatment 
options and in keeping the treated water pH within the allowable limit. 
 The treatment process is not efficient in removal of ammonia and nitrate 
 The total and fecal coliform content of raw water is exceptionally high making the fact of 
increasing contamination of the source by sewage pollution evident. Yet the treatment 
process has shown great success in removing microbiological contamination so far. 
 The major water treatment is accomplished by the clarification process. Water quality is 
sufficiently improved after this stage and the subsequent treatment has the polishing 
effect only. 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
The authors would like to thanks the authority of Saidabad Wastewater Treatment Plant (SWTP) 
for providing the data for the year of 2010. 
 
References 
 
Klees, R. and Silverstein, J. (1992). Improved biological nitrification using recirculation in 
rotating biological contactors. Water Sci. Technol., 26: 546-553. 
Moosavi, G.H., Naddafi, K., Mesdaghinia, A.R. and Nabizadeh, R. (2005). Simultaneous    
Organics and Nutrients Removal from Municipal Wastewater in an Up-flow 
Anaerobic/Aerobic Fixed Bed Reactor. J. Appl. Sci., 5 (3): 503-507. 
Darimont, T., Schwabe, R., Sonneborn, R. and Schulze, G. (1988). Nitrate in drinking water in 
the West Germany wine-growing areas of Baden and WÅrttemberg, Analysis and Chemistry 
of Water Pollutions, Gordon and Breach Science Publisher. 
Gupta, A.B. and Gupta, S.K. (1997). Simultaneous carbon and nitrogen removal in mixed culture 
aerobic RBC biofilm. Water Research, 33: 555-561. 
Nugent, M., Kamrin, M., Wolfson, L. and D'ltri, F.M. (1988). Nitrate a drinking water concern. 
A Publication of the Community Assistance Program in Environmental Toxicology (Capet), 
Center for Environmental Toxicology and the Institute of Water Research, Michigan State 
University. 
WHO (1993). Guidelines for drinking water quality, Geneva, ISBN 92 4 154460. 
1104 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
A STUDY ON THE IMPACT OF DOMESTIC AND INDUSTRIAL WASTE ON WATER 
QUALITY OF TURAG RIVER 
 
 
Md. Mosabbir Pasha1, Aziz Hasan Mahmood1, Md. Asif  Hossain1 and Shahriar Shams2 
 
 
ABSTRACT: Due to rapid urbanization, the Turag river of Dhaka city is faced with the constant 
threat of being polluted. The continuous inflow of pollutants from domestic and industrial sectors 
has become a major concern. Therefore the objective of this study is to characterize pollutant 
loads coming both from residential and industrial areas. In particular this research measured 
effect of domestic and industrial waste effluent on the water quality of Turag river coming from 
Uttara and Tongi. Water samples from three different points were collected and tested for water 
quality. The water quality parameters considered were dissolved oxygen (DO), total dissolved 
solids (TDS), total suspended solids (TSS), biochemical oxygen demand (BOD), chemical 
oxygen demand (COD), total nitrogen (TN), total phosphorus (TP), turbidity, pH and electrical 
conductivity. Magnitude of load concentration flowing into Turag river due to domestic and 
industrial effluent were determined. 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Dhaka is one of the most densely populated city of the world having a population of about 10 
million in metropolitan area (BBS, 2009). Turag river is the water body receiving most of the 
domestic wastes from Uttara resendtial area and industrial wastes are from Tongi industrial area. 
Turag flows marking the edge of the city at its north-western border. Particularly, the northern 
part of Dhaka is expanding rapidly with industries being built by filling wetlands. Shops and 
residential buildings together with small industries and hospitals almost cover the banks of Turag 
river while it crosses the Tongi Bazar, Gazipur and Uttara of Dhaka. 
 
In the last few decades, the river has undergone large changes in chemistry and biology as a 
result of growing human interferences. Currently the river ecosystem is in danger due to various 
factors like deforestation, erosion, sedimentation in the catchment area. There is also significant 
impact on various fish species due to water level reduction, pressure of growing population, and 
the impact of urbanization and industrialization. The increased number of floating people along 
river bank causes degradation of Turag river water quality through open defecation and poor 
hygienic practice.  
                                                        
1Undergraduate student, Department of CEE, IUT, Gazipur, Bangladesh. 
2Assistant Professor, Department of CEE, IUT, Gazipur, Bangladesh.  
 
1105 
 
 
Meanwhile, a significant number of industries have grown along the Turag river with a view to 
use surface water without much trouble and most of them have targeted Turag as a permanent 
disposal site of waste effluent without considering its environmental impact. Another factor for 
the degradation of water quality is due to leakage from septic tank wastes together with kitchen 
wastes from the closely situated Uttara residential area. Besides various medical wastes also 
contribute in the whole process of degradation. 
 
The samples are collected in winter season. Therefore, it shows a deteriorating water quality as 
pollutants are more concentrated due to low water flow in comparison to rainy season. The 
annual rainfall of Dhaka is about 2000 mm and 80% of it occurs in monsoon (Murshed et al., 
2011). 
 
1.1 Objectives 
 
The general objective of this research is to assess the water quality of Turag river and to study the 
impact of industrial and domestic wastes on water quality. The study also makes a comparison of 
various parameters on water quality based on the existing standards for water quality.  
 
 
2. Methodology 
 
2.1 Study area 
 
Dhaka, the capital city of Bangladesh is surrounded by many rivers. Turag flows through the 
north-western part of Dhaka city. The study area consists of that portion of the Turag river which 
flows along the edge of Uttara and Tongi. Uttara and Tongi are two rapidly expanding areas of 
Dhaka city. Both Tongi and Uttara have a flat topography but the drainage network in Tongi is 
very poor compared to Uttara. The average maximum temperature of the area is 34.50C and 
minimum is 11.50C (Murshed et al., 2011). Most of the people living in the study area do not 
have a proper sewage system. There are also a number of slums located along the river bank 
where slum dwellers dispose their waste in Turag river. As a result its water quality is threatened. 
Some major industries are also situated on the bank of the river discharging chemicals and heavy 
metal enriched effluents into the river. Some hospital buildings are found near the river path 
which disposes severe hazardous wastes into the river. 
 
 
2.2 Data availability 
 
All data were obtained from the direct measurements. The field assessments consist of primary 
data, experimental or metadata. The data includes: 
 Standard values set by the government of Bangladesh Environment Conservation Rules 1997 
[ECR ‘97] for inland surface water quality parameters. 
 Standard international values set by the World Health Organization (WHO) for water quality 
parameters. 
 Direct measured values from lab experiment. 
 Metadata consists of information on the data to delineate the study area. 
1106 
 
 Some other data were collected from the literature review. 
 
2.3 Site selection and sample collection 
 
Three sample collection points were selected based on landuse pattern of adjacent areas. 
Topography was not a concern in site selection as it is the same throughout the study area. 
Samples were collected just downstream of pollution sources. Sampling point 1 (Lat. 230 52´ 
55.4´´, Long. 900 24´ 26.4´´) was just downstream of an industry which is a potential source for 
water pollution. Sampling point 2 (Lat. 230 52´ 54.2´´, Long. 900 23´ 58.8´´) and 3 (Lat. 230 52´ 
55.3´´, Long. 900 24´ 24.3´´) were just downstream of a hospital and residential area as shown in 
Figure 1. 
 
 
 
Figure 1 Map showing the sample collection points 
 
Water quality characteristics have been determined in low flow condition. For water quality 
analysis (BOD/COD and bacteriological analysis) 500 ml sterilized sampling bottles covered 
with black polythene and for other analyses 1 L plastic sampling bottles that are free from any 
chemicals were used. The water quality analysis was conducted as per standard procedures. 
 
 
3. Analysis of Different Parameters 
 
3.1 Electric conductivity (EC) 
 
Ability of a substance to conduct electricity is known as electric conductivity. It is more or less a 
linear function of the concentrations of dissolved ions. Conductivity is easily measured and can 
serve as an indicator of other water quality parameters but it has no health concern. Presence of 
calcium, nitrogen, bicarbonate, sulfur, iron and phosphorus can be determined by electric 
conductivity. Conductivity increases due to the presence of dissolved ions in the vicinity. It is a 
quick way to determine the water quality parameters. Conductivity is measured in terms of 
conductivity per unit length. 
 
1107 
 
3.2 Temperature 
 
Many water quality parameters are directly affected by the temperature. Temperature may be 
different in different seasons and varies with the depth of river. If temperature increases amount 
of dissolved oxygen reduces and vise-versa. A short period of high temperature may cause a great 
harm to sensitive species. 
 
3.3 pH 
 
pH is the measure of alkalinity or acidity. The pH of water affects the solubility of many toxic 
chemicals, so the availability of these substances affects aquatic organisms. Most metal becomes 
soluble and more toxic when acidity increases. pH greater than 7 indicates water to be alkaline 
and below 7 indicates it to be acidic. If extremely low or high pH occurs then most of the aquatic 
life will be dead. 
 
3.4 Dissolved oxygen (DO) 
 
Dissolved oxygen is the amount of oxygen present in the water body. Fish and other aquatic lives 
depend on this dissolved oxygen. The amount of dissolved oxygen in the river depend on water 
temperature, the amount of oxygen taken out of the system by decaying or respiring organisms, 
river flow, aeration, quantity of sediment in the stream etc. Dissolved oxygen is measured in mg/l 
or ppm. 
 
3.5 Total dissolved solids (TDS) 
 
Any minerals, salts, metals, cations or anions dissolved in water may be termed as TDS. This 
includes anything present in water other than the pure water molecule and suspended solids. Sum 
of the total positively charged and negatively charged ions is the total dissolved solids. Dissolved 
solids come from both organic and inorganic materials. 
 
3.6 Total suspended solids (TSS) 
 
Solids which remain in suspension in water as a colloid is known as total suspended solids. 
Particles that suspend in water are also called suspended solids. Pollutants and pathogens are 
carried on the surface of particles. The smaller the particles the greater the surface area per unit 
mass of particle. The higher the TSS in water, the higher is its turbidity and lower is its clarity. It 
has no health significance but clear water as got an aesthetic appeal as drinking water. 
 
3.7 Total Phosphorus (TP) 
 
Phosphorus is a nutrient which occurs naturally and is essential for all forms of life. Organic 
enrichment and nutrient status is indicated by phosphorus. Phosphorus forms from weathering of 
rock and decomposition of organic matter. Excessive weed growth and the loss of species 
diversity can occur when phosphorus concentration is too high. 
 
 
 
1108 
 
3.8 Total Nitrogen (TN) 
 
Nitrogen in river water can occur in three forms namely gaseous, inorganic and organic form. 
High concentration of nitrogen containing compounds like ammonia can be toxic to aquatic lives. 
 
3.9 Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) 
 
Natural organic detritus and organic waste from urban and agricultural runoff, waste water 
treatment plants and failing septic systems act as a food source for water-borne bacteria. Bacteria 
decompose these organic materials using dissolved oxygen thus reducing the dissolved oxygen 
(DO) present for fish. The amount of oxygen needed by Bacteria to decompose these organic 
matters present in water is termed as biochemical oxygen demand.BOD₅ is a term used to 
indicate the BOD of a sample of water for a five day period.  
 
3.10 Chemical oxygen demand (COD) 
 
Chemical oxygen demand is a measure of the total quantity of oxygen required to oxidize all 
organic materials to carbon dioxide and water. COD values are always greater than BOD values 
but might take lesser period of time to measure than BOD. 
 
3.11 Turbidity 
 
Turbidity may be defined as the lack of clarity in water due to presence of suspended solids. The 
presence of turbidity is a key test of water quality. Presence of high turbidity in water causes the 
blockage of sunlight and therefore hindering photosynthesis occurring at the aquatic plant level 
and as a result lowers dissolved oxygen.  
 
4. Result 
 
Table 1 Different water quality parameters of Turag river 
 
Paramete
rs 
Different 
water 
quality 
parameter
s at turag 
river 
(december 
2004- 
january 
2005) 
(Begum 
et. al., 
2010) 
Safe 
limit 
for 
inland 
surfac
e 
water 
ECR 
’97 
Sample 
1 
Sample 
2 
Sample 
3 
Temperat
ure (0C) 
27 ----- 21 21 21 
1109 
 
pH 7.6 6.5-
8.5 
7.4 7.5 7.5 
EC 
(µS/cm) 
----- ----- 0.62 0.62 0.82 
Turbidity 
(FTU) 
33 ----- 28.5 20.4 23.1 
DO 
(mg/L) 
4.1 ≥ 6 3.8 3.7 3.7 
BOD 
(mg/L) 
51 ≤ 6 57 55 58 
COD 
(mg/L) 
78 4.0 86 84 87 
TN 
(mg/L) 
----- 1.2 2.45 2.45 2.46 
TDS 
(mg/L) 
3150 ----- 3289 3280 3300 
TSS 
(mg/L) 
76 ----- 98 87 99 
Phosphat
e 
----- 6 4.22 4.41 4.46 0
20
40
60
80
100
a b c d e f
2011
2005
 
0
20
40
60
80
100
a b c d e f
2011 2005
 
 
Figure 2 Comparison between different water quality parameters of year 2005 (Begum et al., 
2010) and year 2011. (In this figure, along horizontal axis, (a) pH, (b) TSS, (c) Turbidity, (d) DO, 
(e) BOD, (f) COD.) 
 
 
 
 
 
1110 
 
5. Discussion 
 
In this study, the measurements carried out for pH shows that the maximum value among the 
points is 7.5 and there is no significant difference among the results. But it is within acceptable 
limit set by ECR ‘97. 
 
The conductivity measurements were not significantly different between samples. Laboratory 
measurements showed that the values found are within the range 0.62 to 0.82. Conductivity 
measured downstream of sample 3 is a bit high than the other two. 
 
Our measured turbidity is far more than the safe limit for inland surface water. Turbidity 
resembles water clarity. From that point of view, Turag river is not up to the mark. 
 
WHO standards indicate that the acceptable range for DO for fresh water is 10-12 mg/L. From 
our analysis, it is found that the present situation is not up to the mark and is not suitable for 
aquatic lives. 
 
The BOD and COD measures found in our experiments is more than safe limit. It shows a 
threatened picture as far as water quality is concerned. The picture has also deteriorated over the 
year. 
 
Nitrogen, found in two forms nitrate and nitrite is a nutrient for algal and plant growth in streams. 
Excess nitrogen generally results from waste water and street runoff in urbanized catchment. For 
surface water the acceptable limit of nitrogen is 10 mg/l (Wondie, 2009). Nitrogen content from 
our experiments show a threatened picture as it is almost double the safe limit. 
 
According to IS: 2296-1982 tolerance for inland surface water subject to pollution, the maximum 
TDS value is 1500 mg/l. In our test the TDS value is almost twice than the acceptable limit. TDS 
value also increased than the previous value. This shows water quality degradation. The reason 
may be the disposal of untreated effluent discharge from industries along the river bank. 
TSS in Turag river is within the range 87 mg/L to 99 mg/L which exceeds the permit level of 
water quality standard of 50 mg/L (Wondie, 2009). Metals discharged from industries along 
Turag river bank are the major contributors. 
 
Phosphate content in Turag river is within safe limit. High Phosphate content accelerates 
eutrophication in lakes. In that context it is not a vital water quality parameter for river water. 
 
6. Recommendation 
 
Due to the hazardous and damaging nature of effluents from industries, Ministry of Environment 
of Bangladesh Government has proposed use of Effluent Treatment Plants (ETP) mandatory for 
all industries since August 1997. At present, industries are constructing ETPs to comply with this 
rule. But these industries often do not seem to follow the rule with a view to cut some costs. That 
is why river water quality did not improve over the past few years as most of the industries do not 
use them although they have ETP plants. It should be noted here that Turag flowing beside 
Tongi, has high potentiality of being polluted because of many industries located in Tongi. Thus 
indigenous water treatment processes should be developed which could run at low costs. The 
1111 
 
vigilance by mobile court should be increased to monitor those industries. To comply with the 
domestic waste disposals in Turag river, residential areas around Turag river must have a well 
defined and well maintained waste disposal system. Meanwhile many developing countries are 
coping up with cheap and efficient means like sanitary landfill, incineration, recycling etc to have 
a better way of disposing of wastes. 
 
Proper sanitation facilities are needed for slum areas as they are significant source of fecal 
contamination. In this context cost effective simple pit latrines should be implemented at safe 
distance from river bank. The settlement along river banks should be prohibited and slum 
dwellers might be moved to some permanent areas. The slum dwellers should be encouraged to 
practice hygiene. 
 
Efficient solid waste management should be implemented in residential areas around Uttara and 
Tongi. Door to door household waste collection and hospital waste collection systems should be 
introduced in the Turag river adjoining areas.  
 
Tongi Bazar, just on the bank of Turag river is a viable source of organic wastes. A proper 
disposal system for these organic wastes should be adopted. The most effective of all is to create 
public awareness. Media can play vital role in creating public awareness. Other than this, proper 
implementation of environmental laws must be ensured by the government. 
 
References 
 
BBS. (2009). “statistical yearbook of Bangladesh”, Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics, march 2009, 
p. 43. 
Murshed, S. B., Islam, A. S. and Khan, M.S.A. (2011). Impact of Climate Change on Rainfall 
Intensity in Bangladesh. Proc. of the 3rd Int. Conf. on Water and Flood Management 
(IWCFM-2011), pp. 2-3. 
Begum, D. A. and Ahmmed, K. M. T. (2010). Water quality Aspects in and Around Dhaka City. 
Proc. of  International Conference on Environmental Aspects of  Bangladesh (ICEAB10), 
japan, pp. 2. 
Ministry of Environment and Forest, Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh, “The 
Environment Conservation Rules, 1997,” August, 1997. 
Wondie, T. A. (2009). Impact of Urban Water Storm Runoff and Domestic Waste Effluent on 
Water Quality of Lake Tana and Local Groundwater Near the City of Bahir Dar, Ethiopia. A 
thesis presented to the faculty of the graduate school of Cornell university in partial 
fulfillments of the requirements for the degree of master of professional studies, pp. 31-40. 
 
1112 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
ELECTRICITY GENERATION USING A MEMBRANE LESS MICROBIAL FUEL 
CELL DURING WASTE WATER TREATMENT 
 
 
Tammin Haque1, Rubayat Tarannum1, M. S.  A.  Amin2, Maksudur R. Khan3 
 
 
ABSTRACT: Membrane less microbial fuel cell (ML-MFC) could be an attractive approach to 
waste water treatment and electricity generation. Current generation in laboratory scale Mediator 
less and membrane less MFC (ML-MFC) has been studied in batch mode.  The ML MFC was 
designed and fabricated using available local materials. Glass wool and glass bead were used as 
separation medium. Microorganisms were used as biocatalysts and artificial waste water was 
tested as substrate. . The main objective was to investigate the current generation of MFC in 
different operating conditions, such as –sludge concentration, initial substrate concentration, 
aeration in cathode compartment. In addition, COD removing capability of the ML MFC was 
also studied.  Measured parameter were current, COD. Using Graphite electrodes the electricity 
generation in this MFC was observed with different influent COD concentration. A maximum 
power density was observed 8.98mW/m2 at current density of 34.02 mA/m2. COD removal was 
observed 44% to 54% in all experiments. The electricity generation is lower but further research 
could be optimizing power production. 
 
 
1. Introduction 
In the recent years the increased power demand, depleting fossil fuel resources and growing 
environmental pollution have led the world to think seriously for other alternative sources of 
energy. Microbial fuel cell can be an attractive alternative source of energy. This is a type of fuel 
cell by which common waste materials and the chemical energy locked within them could be 
utilized, would offer many benefits. In MFC type fuel cells, the organic contaminants present in 
the wastewater are oxidized and during this process direct electricity recovery is possible. Thus, 
simultaneous wastewater treatment and electricity recovery can be achieved. In addition, excess 
sludge production is very low in MFC, as compared to conventional aerobic wastewater 
treatment, reducing the cost of further sludge management (Rabary and Verstrate , 2005). 
Microbial fuel cells (MFCs) are devices that use bacteria as the catalysts to oxidize organic and 
inorganic matter and generate current (Berk et al., 1964;  Rao et al., 1976; Cohen, 1931). 
                                                        
1 Student, Department of Chemical Engineering and Polymer Science, SUST, Sylhet, Bangladesh. 
momin_cep@yahoo.com  
2 Lecturer, Department of Chemical Engineering and Polymer Science, SUST, Sylhet, Bangladesh. 
saikat_cep@yahoo.com 
3 Professor, Department of Chemical Engineering and Polymer Science, SUST, Sylhet, Bangladesh. 
saikat_cep@yahoo.com  
1113 
 
Microbial fuel cell is made up of two compartments, anode and cathode, separated with proton/ 
cation exchange membrane. Microorganisms oxidize the substrate and produce electrons and 
protons in the anode chamber of MFC. Electrons collected on the anode are transported to 
cathode by external circuit and protons are transferred through the membrane internally. Thus, 
potential difference is produced between anode and cathode chamber due to dissimilar liquid 
solutions. Electrons and protons are consumed in the cathode compartment by utilizing oxygen 
from water. 
 
In a microbial fuel cell, different substrates such as glucose, molasses, lactose and wastewater 
have been used for the generation of electrical energy by their fermentation with different 
bacteria. Chemical mediators can be added to the system to allow electricity production by 
bacteria unable to otherwise use the electrode. The most frequently used mediators in microbial 
fuel cell are Dye mediators such as neutral red, methylene blue, thionine, humic acid (Delaney et 
al., 1984; Lithgow et al., 1986; Park and Zeikus, 2000) Other popular mediators include 
benzylviologen, 2,6-dichlorophenolindophenol, 2-hydroxy-1,4-naphthoquinone and various 
phenazines, phenothiazines, phenoxoazines, iron chelates and neutral red. Most studies have used 
electrodes of solid graphite, graphite-felt, carbon cloth and platinum coated graphite cathode 
electrode. 
 
Commercial application of MFCs for wastewater treatment is difficult because mediators are 
expensive and toxic in nature. Hence, today emphasize is being given on development of 
mediator less MFC, enhancing its power production, and reduction of its operational cost, to 
increase its acceptance as wastewater treatment process. A mediator-less microbial fuel cell does 
not required a mediator but uses electrochemically active bacteria to transfer electrons to the 
electrode (Tanisho et al. 1989; Gradskov et al. 2001; Chaudhuri and Lovley 2003; Pham et al. 
2004). Shewanella putrefaciens, Aeromonas hydrophila and some others are the 
electrochemically active bacteria. This type of microbial fuel cells is reported by Kim et al., 
2002. In addition, various bacteria such as Escherichia coli, Enterobacter aerogenes, Clostridium 
butyricum, Clostridium acetobutylicum, Clostridium perfringens have been found to be active in 
hydrogen production under anaerobic conditions (Lewis 1966; Raeburn and Rabinowitz 1971; 
Akiba et al. 1987; Ardeleanu et al.1983). 
 
 Also, application of MFC in large scale for wastewater treatment containing suspended solids 
will be limited due to high initial cost of the membrane and fouling of the membrane requiring 
replacement. The acceptability of MFC for wastewater treatment would increase, if use of 
membrane can be eliminated using some alternative. Thus, a membrane-less MFC can improve 
the economic feasibility. To fulfill the purpose a membrane-less microbial fuel cell was 
developed and its performance was observed. The objectives of this research work were: 
 To design and fabricate ML MFC with available local materials. 
 To investigate the current generation capability of the ML MFC. 
 To study the waste water treatment potential of the MFC. 
 To obtain polarization and power curves of MFC at different operating condition and 
compare the results.  
 
 
1114 
 
2.  Methods 
 
2.1  Membrane-less microbial fuel cell construction   
 
The Mediator less & membrane-less MFC was designed and fabricated in the laboratory using 
available local materials. It was made up of uPVC cylinder having effective height of 28 cm and 
internal diameter of 10.5 cm. Anode compartment (depth 12 cm) was placed at bottom and 
cathode compartment (depth 12 cm) was at top. Glass wool (2 cm depth) and glass bead (2 cm 
depth) were placed at the upper portion of the anode compartment separating anode and cathode. 
Graphite rods obtained from local dry cell factory were placed in anode and cathode 
compartment to be used as electrodes. The total apparent surface area of the anode was 50.2656 
cm2.The electrodes were connected with copper wire through the external resistance ranging from 
1.6 Ω to 152 KΩ, excluding the resistance of copper connecting wire and a multimeter. Contact 
between electrodes and copper wires were sealed with epoxy material. 
 
 
Figure 2.1:  Photograph of membrane less microbial fuel cell 
 
2.2  Wastewater composition and inoculation of MFC  
The synthetic wastewater used as fuel was supplied at a rate of 7ml/min to 15 ml/min to the 
bottom of the anode compartment and the effluent left through the cathode compartment at top of 
the MFC. The composition of waste water was 300-900 mg/L glucose,500mg/L sodium hydrogen 
carbonate, 97.7mg/L ammonium chloride,142mg/L K2HPO4, 8.7mg/L KH2PO4, 74.3mg/L 
calcium chloride & 23.2mg/L MgSO4.7H2O  The cathode compartment was aerated in its cathode 
compartment with an aquarium pump at an air pressure of 3 psig. The sludge was collected from 
1115 
 
Sylhet Surma Residential Area’s waste water drainage system. The cell was operated in batch 
mode at room temperature (30 ± 5°C). 
2.3  Analysis 
The potential was measured using a digital multimeter and converted to power according to P= 
iV, where P = power (W), i = current (A), and V = voltage (V). Influent and effluent 
characteristics such as, COD, pH were measured. 
3. Result and Discussion: 
3.1  Effect of aeration in the cathode chamber in Membrane less MFC  
 
To explore the effect of aeration in the cathode chamber on current production of 
Membrane less MFC, two different batch study of membrane less MFC were operated 
under two different conditions. The first batch was aerated in its cathode chamber .Feed 
compositions were fixed in two batches. The sludge concentrations were also fixed 
50ml/L. The target of this experiment was to find a trend to describe effect of sludge 
concentration. The influent was feed at an average flow rate of 8.5ml/min. All the 
currents were measured in closed circuit. External resistance of 10 was used to 
measure current. The cells were run for about 28 hr and the corresponding currents 
were recorded with respect to time. The results are shown as current vs. time in the 
Figure 3.1.   
 
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
220
240
260
280
300
320
Cu
rr
en
t (
 µ
A 
)
Time (hr)
 600 ppm glucose with aeration
 600 ppm glucose without aeration
 
Figure 3.1 Effect of the aeration in the cathode chamber on the current production of Membrane 
less MFC. Fixed concentration of Salts and substrate (600mg/L) was used in two batches.  10 
external resistances were used to measure current in each batch 
The graph illustrates that, the batch that was aerated gives initial current generation 201µA and 
was very unstable. Current initially decreased with time. After some time production increased 
then it decreased again. Maximum current was 250 µA (obtained at 24 hr). The batch which was 
1116 
 
not aerated gives unstable current generation. Initial current was higher than the other batch and 
was 300 µA. But current decreases with time. At the end it was much more less than the other 
batch. Initial current was the maximum current. At the end the readings were 186 µA and 52 µA 
respectively. 
This graph clearly shows that, aeration in the cathode chamber has a great effect on current 
generation. Without cathode aeration the generation of current shows a decreasing trend. As the 
cathode compartment was not aerated, so the amount of dissolved oxygen in cathode 
compartment was decreasing with time. So, the current generation was decreasing with time. 
 
3.2 Effect of   sludge concentration in Membrane less MFC  
 
To explore the effect of Sludge concentration in the current production of Membrane 
less MFC, two different batch study of membrane less MFC were operated with two 
different solutions having a fixed concentration of salts and substrate & with a variable 
the Figure 3.2.   
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
20
30
40
50
60
70
Cu
rr
en
t (
µA
)
Time (hr)
 600 ppm glucose & 100 ml/L sludge
 600 ppm glucose & 50 ml/L sludge
 
Figure 3.2 Effect of the sludge concentration on the current generation of Membrane less MFC. 
Fixed concentration of Salts and substrate (600mg/L) was used in two batches. Variable 
concentration of sludge (50ml/L &100 ml/L) was used in two batches respectively.  2.67K 
external resistances were used in each batch. 
 
sludge concentration. The sludge concentrations were variable (50ml/L & 100ml/L). The target 
of this experiment was to find a trend to describe effect of sludge concentration. The influent was 
feed at an average flow rate of 8.5ml/min. All of the batches were aerated in cathode chamber 
with an aquarium pump at an air pressure of 3 psig.All the currents were measured in closed 
circuit and the cells were connected with external resistance of 2.67K. The cells were run for 
about 28 hr and the corresponding currents were recorded with respect to time. The results are 
shown as current vs. time in 
The graph illustrates that, the batch using 100 ml/L sludge at the influent showed better current 
production. Initial current generation was 57µA and was very unstable. Current initially 
decreased with time. After some time production increased then it decreased again. Maximum 
1117 
 
current was 66 µA (obtained at 24 hr).  The batch using 50 ml/L sludge at the influent gave initial 
current of 30µA. The current generation was much lower than the other batch. But current was 
very unstable like previous batch. Maximum current was 39 µA (at 25 hr). At the end, the 
readings were 58 µA and 25 µA respectively in two batches. 
From this graph no specific trend could be found. But it’s clearly shows that, for a fix amount of 
substrate and salt current generation increases with increasing the sludge concentration. 
  
3.3  Effect of initial Glucose concentration in Membrane less MFC  
 
To explore the effect of initial substrate concentration in the current production of Membrane less 
MFC, three different batch study of membrane less MFC were operated with three different 
solutions having a fixed concentration of salts and variable substrate concentrations. The salts 
were 500mg/L sodium hydrogen carbonate, 97.7mg/L ammonium chloride,142mg/L K2HPO4, 
8.7mg/L KH2PO4, 74.3mg/L calcium chloride & 23.2mg/L MgSO4.7H2O. And the glucose 
concentrations were 300, 600 and 900mg/L. The target of this experiment was to find a trend to 
describe effect of initial substrate concentration. The influent was feed at an average flow rate of 
9 ml/min. All of the batches were aerated in its cathode chamber with an aquarium pump at an air 
pressure of 3 psig.Fixed concentration of Salts and variable concentration of substrate 
(300,600&900mg/L) was used in three batch. 2.67K external resistances were used in each 
batch. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.3 Effect of the initial substrate concentration on the current production of Membrane 
less MFC. 
 
All the currents were measured in closed circuit and the cells were connected with external 
resistance of 2.67K. The cells were run for about 29 hr and the corresponding currents were 
recorded with respect to time. The results are shown as current vs. time in the Figure 3.3.   
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
C
ur
re
nt
 ( 
m
ic
ro
 A
)
Time (hr)
 300 ppm glucose
 600 ppm glucose
 900 ppm glucose
1118 
 
 
The graph illustrates that, the batch using 300mg/L glucose at the influent showed better current 
production then other two. Initial current production were 33µA and production increased with 
time. The batch using 900ppm glucose at the influent gave initial current of 31µA. the current 
production was very close to the batch of 300ppm glucose. But finally the increasing rate of 
current was less. And the batch containing 600ppm glucose gives very low production of current 
then the others. The maximum current was 110µA for batch containing 300ppm glucose (at 28 
hr), was 79 µA for batch containing 600ppm glucose (at 27 hr) And was 95 µA for batch 
containing 900ppm glucose (at 28 hr).At the end of 29 hr current for batch containing 300ppm, 
600ppm and 900ppm glucose were 106µA, 24µA and 85µA respectively.    
 
From this graph we can say current will increase with time and will become stable after running 
the cell for a long period. 
 
3.4 Removal of COD from Influent to Effluent 
It has been reported that microorganisms can convert organic matter into electricity using MFCs 
while simultaneously accomplishing wastewater treatment. During this thesis work, membrane 
less MFC was continuously monitored for COD removal to enumerate the potential of fuel cell to 
act as wastewater treatment unit. The following figure shows the waste water treatment potential 
of ML MFC used in this research. The associated data is similar to the section 3.3. 
In 29 hr experiment three batches of ML MFC (variable glucose concentration of 300ppm, 600 
ppm and 900 ppm) showed similar kind of result. After 2 hour COD removal were 14.66%, 
13%& 14.28% respectively for three batches. And after 25 hr COD removal were 49% 50.88% 
and 52.38% respectively for the batch containing 300ppm, 600ppm & 900ppm glucose and fixed 
amount of salts and sludge. From the curve it is clear that the COD removal efficiency dose not 
depends on glucose concentration, but it depends on time. 
3.5 Polarization and Power Curve 
The performance of the anode, cathode and cell were analyzed by polarization curves (E-j 
curves). The polarization curve characterizes the cell voltage as a function of current. The 
current, in turn, depends on the size of the electrical load placed across the fuel cell. In essence 
the polarization curve shows the electrochemical efficiency of the fuel cell at any operating 
current. Since fuel cell's polarization curve indicated the relationship between voltage and current 
at all operating condition, it can be used to derive a corresponding power curve. At any point 
along the curve the instantaneous power is represented graphically as the rectangular area that 
just touches the curve. At the peak point of the power curve, the internal resistance of the cell is 
equal to the electrical resistance of the external circuit. Electrodes potential were measured at 
various current densities to investigate the effect of polarization on MFC operation. 
Figure 3.5.1 and figure 3.5.2 shows the polarization curve and power density vs. current density 
curve for MFC having the variable substrate concentration (300,600 and 900 ppm glucose). 
These data were taken at the 2nd day of MFC operation. 
1119 
 
Figure 3.4 Percent removal of COD in terms of time for three batches of MFC.  Fixed 
concentration of Salts and variable concentration of substrate (300,600&900mg/L) was used in 
three batches. 
  
0 20 40 60 80 100 120
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Vo
lta
ge
 (V
)
Current density (m A/m2)
  300 ppm glucose
  600 ppm glucose
  900 ppm glucose
Figure 3.5.1 Polarization curve for MFC having the variable substrate concentration (300,600 and 
900 ppm glucose). 
From the Figure 3.5.1 it is observed that, the current density of the cell increased when the cell 
potential decreased. The maximum potential was recorded 0.434 Volt at the cell containing 
300mg/L glucose. And the least potential was recorded 0.088 Volt at the cell containing 600mg/L 
glucose. A potential of 0.339 volt was obtained at glucose concentration of 900 mg/L. 
 
0 5 10 15 20 25
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
%
 C
O
D
 R
em
ov
al
Time (hr)
 300 ppm glucose & fixed salts
 600 ppm glucose & fixed salts
 900 ppm glucose & fixed salts
1120 
 
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
po
w
er
 d
en
si
ty
 (m
W
/m
2)
Current density(mA/m2)
 300 ppm glucose
 600 ppm glucose
 900 ppm glucose
  
Figure 3.5.2 Power curve for for MFC having the variable substrate concentration (300,600 and 
900 ppm glucose). 
 
Figure 3.5.2 shows the power density curve as a function of current density. Power densities were 
measured at variable external resistances. Current generation in different resistors was observed 
once the stable voltage was attained. From the figure.3.5.2, maximum power density was 
recorded 8.981092 mW/m2 at the current density of 34.01929 mA/m2 for the cell containing 
300mg/L glucose substrate. For 600mg/L and  900mg/L of glucose substrate concentration , the 
maximum power densities were found to be 0.50157563 mW/m2 and 5.8101366mW/m2 for 
current densities of  8.753501 mA/m2 and  32.826 mA/m2 respectively. So, the trend in power 
generation is like the following: 
 
(The cell containing 300ppm glucose substrate solution) > (The cell containing 900ppm glucose 
substrate solution) > (The cell containing 600ppm glucose substrate solution) 
At first, the power densities showed an incremental trend with increasing external resistance. But 
after reaching a peak value, the power densities begin to fall down with increasing resistance and 
current density. Current generation showed decreasing trend with increase in resistance and is 
consistent with the reported literature  (Min and Logan 2004) which indicated a typical fuel cell 
behavior. At higher resistance used, relatively less power density was observed. Relatively less 
voltage drop was observed at lower resistance indicating less potential drop. Voltage stabilization 
was comparatively rapid at higher resistances studied. Effective electron discharge observed at 
lower resistances might be the probable reason for further potential drop and slow stabilization of 
the voltage at lower resistances. Oxidation of substrates by microbes was observed to be more at 
lower resistance than at higher resistance, where microbes donated electrons to the anode as the 
electrons were discharged in a closed circuit (Liu et al.,2005) compared the current generation 
potentiality of different substrate and source inoculums. The power produced reported in our 
study is relatively moderate comparing to other researchers working with same substrate. 
1121 
 
Relatively lower power observed in this study might be because of using graphite electrode 
without any coating.  
 
From all the polarization curves, it can be noted that, the losses of potential is mainly due to the 
ohmic polarization which was expected for this kind of fuel cells. The loss due to concentration 
polarization & activation polarization is negligible.  
 
 
4. Conclusions  
Membrane Less Microbial Fuel cell was fabricated and constructed with local materials. The 
performance of mediator-less & membrane-less MFC was observed under different condition and 
as wastewater treatment unit. Maximum power density was recorded 8.981092 mW/m2 at the 
current density of 34.01929 mA/m2 for the cell containing 300mg/L glucose substrate. 
The performance depends on different factors. Performance of ML MFC should be observed for 
long times in continuous mode.Further studies are necessary to understand the effect of different 
operational parameters and optimize the electricity production from the MFC. Thus, the 
combination of wastewater treatment along with electricity production may help in compensating 
the cost of wastewater treatment, making it sustainable. 
References 
Akiba, T., Bennetto, H.P., Stirling, J.L.  and. Tanaka, K., (1987).Electricity Production from 
Alkalophilic   Organisms. Biotechnol. Lett., 9(9): 611-616. 
Ardeleanu, D.G., Margineanu and Vais, H., (1983). Electrochemical Conversion in Biofuel Cells 
Using Clostridium butyricum or Staphylococcus aureus,Oxford Bioelectrochem. Bioenerg., 11: 
273-277. 
Berk, R. S.; Canfield, J. H., (1964). Bioelectrochemical energy conversion.Appl. Microbiol, 12: 
10-12 
Chaudhuri, S.K. and Lovley D.R., (2003).Electricity Generation by Direct Oxidation of Glucose 
in Mediatorless Microbial Fuel Cells. Nat. Biotechnol., 21: 1229-1232. 
Cohen, B. The bacterial culture as an electrical half-cell, (1931). J. Bacteriol., 21:18-19. 
Delaney G. M., Benntto H. P., Mason J. R., Roller H. D. Stirling J. L., Thurston C. F. (1984). 
Electron transfer coupling in microbial fuel cell: 2. Performance of fuel cells containing selected 
microorganism mediator substrate combinations. J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol. 34B; 13-27. 
Gradskov, D.A., Kazarinov, I.A.  and Ignatov, V.V. , (2001). Bioelectrochemical Oxidation of 
Glucose with Bacteria Escherichia coli. Russ. J. Electrochem., 37: 1216-1219. 
Kim, H.J., Park, H.S.,  Hyun, M.S.,  . Chang, I.S, Kim, M.  and Kim, B.H. ,(2002). A Mediator-
less Microbial Fuel Cell Using a Metal Reducing Bacterium, Shewanella putrefaciens. Enzyme 
Microb. Technol., 30: 145-152. 
Lewis, K., (1966). Symposium on Bioelectrochemistry of Microorganisms IV. Biochemical Fuel 
Cells. Bacteriol. Rev., 30: 101-113. 
Lithgow A. M., Romero L., Sanchez I. C., Souto F. A., Vega C. A. (1986). Interception of 
electron-transport chain in bacteria with hydrophilic redox mediators. J. Chem. Res. 5; 178-179. 
Liu, H., Cheng, S. and Logan, B. E., (2005). Production of electricity from acetate or butyrate 
using a single-chamber microbial fuel cell. Environ. Sci. Technol.,39:658–662. 
1122 
 
Min, B. and Logan, B. E., (2004). Continuous electricity generation from domestic wastewater 
and organic substrates in a flat plate microbial fuel cell. Environ. Sci. Technol., 38: 58 
Park D.H., Zeikus J.G. (2000). Electricity generation in microbial fuel cells using neutral red as 
an electronophore. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 66; 1292-1297. 
Pham, H.T., J.K. Jang, I.S. Chang and B.H. Kim, (2004). Improvement of Cathode Reaction of a 
Mediatorless Microbial Fuel Cell. J. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 14: 324-329. 
Raeburn, S. and Rabinowitz, J.C.  1971. Pyruvate: Ferredoxin Oxidoreductase. I. The Pyruvate-
CO ExchangeReaction. Arch. Biochem. Biophys., 146: 9-20. 
Rao, J. R.; Richter, G. J.; Von Sturm, F.; Weidlich, E., (1976). The performance of glucose 
electrodes and the characteristics of different biofuel cell constructions. Bioelectrochem. 
Bioenerg., 3: 139-150. 
Tanisho, S., Kamiya, N.  and Wakao, N.  (1989). Microbial Fuel Cell Using Enterobacter 
aerogenes. Bioelectrochem Bioenerg., 21: 25-32. 
 
 
 1123 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
PERFORMANCE OF WATER HYACINTH FOR IMPROVING THE EFFLUENT 
QUALITY OF A TYPICAL PAPER MILL 
 
 
Md. Selim Reza1, Prof. Dr. Md. Saiful Islam1, Md. Ashekur Rahman2, Kumar Fagun Mallick1 
and Jewel Kumar Golder1. 
 
 
ABSTRACT: Waste water treatment using aquatic plants is gradually gaining importance. Water 
hyacinth is one of the most promising aquatic plants which have been successfully used all over 
the world in industrial waste water treatment. In this study an experimental investigation has been 
carried out to find the effectiveness of water hyacinth in control of water pollution due to the 
waste water discharged from the paper industry. This study focuses on the characteristics of 
liquid waste of existing paper industry in Khulna. In our country very small efforts have been 
taken for the treatment of industrial waste. Most of the existing industries dispose of liquid waste 
having pollutants exceeding the respective environmental quality standard. This study shows that 
the effluents from this industry can be effectively treated by water hyacinth ponds as an 
alternative low cost treatment method before discharge of raw liquid waste into a surface water 
body. In this study different experiments have been conducted to determine the removal rate of 
pollutants with giving importance to color, turbidity, suspended solid, COD, DO, pH, Nitrate, 
Sulphate, Phosphate, Organic content, ignoring the effect of different types of water hyacinth in 
the treatment of waste water. The plants having long and extensive root system are used. 
Reprehensive samples of “Sattar Paper Mill” were collected and polluting parameters were 
analyzed in the Environmental Engineering laboratory in KUET. Water hyacinths were used to 
treat this liquid waste at different concentration in some plastic buckets. Samples from these 
buckets were collected at regular interval and pollutant contents were determined. This process 
was repeated to determine the removal of pollutants by water hyacinth. This study reveals that 
water hyacinth could be positively used in the treatment of waste water. It was found that 
removal rate of pollutants by water hyacinth are excellent if the waste water is diluted fifty 
percents. 
 
 
1.  Introduction 
 
In the world various environmental concerns have been focused by the scientists and researchers 
where the waste water handling is one of them. Water pollution is growing in today’s civilization 
by direct discharging or discharging after partial treatment of waste water to the surface water 
bodies for what affecting the natural ecosystem and creating the most severe problem like 
biodiversity. With growing wealth, global consumption of water has recently been doubling 
                                                        
1 Khulna University of Engineering & Technology, Khulna-9203, Bangladesh, rezaselim30@yahoo.com. 
2 Khulna Water Supply and Sewerage Authority (KWASA), Khulna, Bangladesh. 
 1124 
every 20 years, more than twice the rate of human population growth but the reduction of this 
period is expected if today’s trend in water use continues (Water for Life- Policy Framework, 
http://ec.europa.eu). One can say the situation is alarming if it is known that because of fresh 
water disposition on earth only one third of its territory is well provide with water, and if drastic 
efforts in water protection are not made by the year 2025, 2.3 billion people will live in areas 
with chronic water shortage (Solutions for a Water-Short World, http://info.k4health.org and 
Water Scarcity, http://regquery.bau.edu.jo). Throughout history, people have used a number 
of adaptation measures in response to water shortages and during the 20th century, the three most 
common strategies have been to construct dams and reservoirs to store water, to irrigate crops in 
low rainfall areas, and to withdraw groundwater in areas where there is little fresh water. But 
these are not enough to combat physical water scarcity in the future and that’s why the 
researchers have been emphasized on increasing the efficiency of water use, the pricing of water 
services, improving water distribution networks, recycling water, control of water pollution etc. 
(Managing water shortages, http://www.globe-net.com). The trend over the past several 
decades in the construction of water pollution control facilities for metropolitan areas has been 
toward “concrete and steel” alternatives. With the advent of higher energy prices and higher labor 
costs, these systems have become significant cost items for the industries that operate them. 
Processes that use relatively more land and are lower in energy use and labor costs are therefore 
becoming attractive alternatives for these industries. The high cost of some conventional 
treatment processes has produced economic pressures and has caused engineers to search for 
creative, cost effective and environmentally sound ways to control of water pollution. Finally, 
they have got one technical approach in natural wetland which served as a model for construction 
of systems for waste water purification by aquatic plants (Design Manual, 1988). There are many 
different types of these alternative systems (constructed wetlands, aquatic systems etc.) but all of 
them have the same major characteristics – thanks to symbiotic relationships between their basic 
components, aquatic plants (Peterson et al., 1996), microorganisms (Perkin et al., 2000) algae, 
substrates and water they have the ability to remove organic and inorganic matter, nutrients, 
pathogens, heavy metals and other pollutants from wastewater. In aquatic systems, wastewater is 
treated principally by means of bacterial metabolism and physical sedimentation (Design Manual, 
1988). The aquatic plants themselves bring about little actual treatment of the wastewater 
(Tchobanoglous, 1987). Their function is generally to support components of the aquatic 
environment that improve the wastewater treatment capability and/or reliability of that 
environment (Stowell et al., 1990). In last few years a great interest has been shown for research 
on aquatic macrophysics as good candidates for pollutants removal or even as bio-indicators for 
heavy metals in aquatic ecosystems (Aoi et al., 1996 and Maine et al., 1999) Aquatic plant 
systems are shallow ponds with floating or submerged aquatic plants. The most thoroughly 
studied systems are those which use water hyacinth or duckweed (Design Manual, 1988). Water 
hyacinth (Eichhornia crassipes), one of the great number of aquatic plant species successfully 
used for waste water treatment in decades, was of particular importance. It is important to 
emphasize that Eichhornia crassipes has a huge potential for removal of the vast range of 
pollutants from wastewater (Chua, 1998, De Casabianca, 1995 and Sim, 2003) because they 
spread laterally until the water. 
 
Surface is covered and then the vertical growth increases. Hyacinths are very productive photo 
synthetic plants. Their rapid growth is a serious nuisance problem in many slow flowing 
waterways. These same attributes become an advantage when used in a wastewater treatment 
system (Design Manual, 1988). The growth rates in water hyacinth systems depend on 
 1125 
temperature. Both air and water temperatures are important in assessing plant vitality. Water 
hyacinths are reported to survive 24 hour exposure at temperatures of 0.5 to -5°C (33 to 31°F) but 
die at temperatures of -6 to -7°C (21 to 19°F) and cannot become established in regions where 
winter temperatures average 1⁰C (34°F). Growth is rapid at 20-30°C (68-96°F) and nearly stops 
at 8-15°C (46-59°F) (Stephenson, et al., 1980). So from above discussion, water hyacinth 
systems can be the best option for improving the effluent quality and used to advantage in 
correcting algal bloom problems in oxidation ponds.  
 
In account of the above advantageous point of view, water hyacinths have been used in this study 
for the treatment of wastewater coming from the Paper Mill. The samples were collected two 
times from the paper mill and tested in the laboratory. The aim of this paper is to determine the 
feasibility of water hyacinth in treating wastewater. The overall objectives of this study is to 
determine the effluent characteristics of paper industry, to observe environmental problem arisen 
from the disposal of wastewater, to know the efficiency of water hyacinth in the treatment of 
wastewater of the paper mill and to observe the necessity of treatment plant for wastewater 
management of   paper mill. 
 
 
2. Methodology 
 
First, an industry was selected as a sampling site situated near the Rupsha Bridge in Khulna 
(namely Sattar Paper Mill) and the samples were collected from the discharging point of the final 
disposal site. Two drums of about 35 liters were used to collect the sample each time and carried 
carefully to control agitating as much as possible. Then the samples were tested within one day 
after collection. After that the samples were prepared to four different concentrations and placed 
in four different plastic buckets and arranged as shown in the following fig-1, 2, 3 & 4
 
 
    
Fig-1: Initial Situation 
of water hyacinth 
(25%) 
Fig-2: Initial 
Situation of water 
hyacinth (50%) 
 
Fig-3: Initial Situation 
of water hyacinth 
(75%) 
 
Fig-4: Initial Situation 
of water hyacinth 
(100%) 
 
 
Firstly, the parameters (i.e color, turbidity, suspended solid, COD, DO, pH, nitrate, sulphate, 
phosphate, organic content) were tested for the raw waste water and placed in four different 
 1126 
plastic buckets with the above fashion. In this study, the same parameters have been tested at a  
week interval to determine the removal rate of pollutants present in waste water. Ignoring the 
effect of different types of water hyacinth in the treatment of waste water, the plants having long 
and extensive root systems were used.  
 
To find out better efficiency, the samples were prepared into four different concentrations such as 
100%, 75%, 50% and 25%. Here 100% means the raw waste water and 75%, 50%, 25% mean the 
volumetric percentage of waste water to tap water. 
 
 
3. Results and Discussion 
 
Some parameters were selected according to the department of environment (DOE, 2005) of 
Bangladesh and those selected parameters were tested in the laboratory which has been given in 
below Table-1 only for sample-1: 
 
Table-1: Effluent Characteristics of Sample-1 
Initial Reading 1st week Reading 2nd week Reading Name 
of the 
test 
100
% 
75
% 
50
% 
25
% 
100
% 
75
% 
50
% 
25
% 
100
% 
75
% 
50
% 
25
% 
pH 7.97 
8.0
1 
8.0
4 
8.0
5 
7.8
9 
7.9
9 
8.0
2 
8.0
3 
7.8
1 
7.9
3 
7.9
8 
8.0
1 
Color 
(Pt-
Co) 
365 249 215 139 268 158 149 
13
1 197 155 66 13 
Turbid
ity 
(NTU) 
21.
90 
15.
00 
10.
20 
6.8
0 
15.
70 
13.
20 
8.7
0 
5.1
0 
12.
30 
11.
00 
6.1
0 
4.2
0 
TDS 
(gm/L
) 
12.
89 
10.
63 
7.8
9 
5.0
2 
12.
72 
10.
36 
7.4
4 
4.6
3 
12.
53 
9.9
4 
7.2
6 
4.4
3 
TS 
(gm/L
) 
13.
22 
10.
90 
7.9
8 
5.0
8 
12.
76 
10.
45 
7.5
3 
4.7
9 
12.
59 
10.
16 
7.3
5 
4.4
9 
COD 
(mg/L
) 
352
.0 
208
.0 
112
.0 
48.
0 
336
.0 
176
.0 
128
.0 
68.
0 
304
.0 
96.
0 
48.
0 
14.
0 
 
 From the above table it is cleared that the value of pH, turbidity has been decreased with elapsed 
time but the decreasing rate is highest for the 100% concentrated wastewater which are shown in 
table by blue color but the color, TDS, TS & COD removal rate is highest for 25% concentrated 
wastewater which are shown in table by red color after two weeks. The removal efficiency using 
water hyacinths have been graphically represented in below figure: 
 
             
 1127 
 
  
Fig-5: Variation of color at different 
concentration of sample-1 
 
Fig-6: Variation of color at different 
concentration of sample-2 
 
From the above graph it is observed that the color value of the different concentration wastewater 
decreases resulting from water hyacinth use. However the reduction rate of color is higher in case 
of higher concentrated wastewater than that of lower concentrated wastewater.   
 
From fig-3 & 4 it is observed that the turbidity value of the different concentration wastewater 
decreases resulting from water hyacinth use. However the reduction rate of turbidity is higher in 
case of higher concentrated wastewater than that of lower concentrated wastewater. 
             
 
  
 
Fig-7: Variation of Turbidity at different 
concentration of sample-1 
 
Fig-7: Variation of Turbidity at different 
concentration of sample-2 
 
From fig-7 & 8 it is observed that the COD value of the different concentration wastewater 
decreases resulting from the use of water hyacinth with elapsed time. However the reduction rate 
of COD is approximately equal for four different concentrations. Similarly the curves for TS, 
TDS can be represented and the reduction rate of TS and TDS are approximately equal for four 
different concentrations. 
 
 1128 
  
 
Fig-9: Variation of pH at different 
concentration of sample-1 
 
 
Fig-10: Variation of pH at different 
concentration of sample-2 
 
From fig-5 the value of pH is decreased with elapsed time but the decreasing rate is higher for 
100% concentrated wastewater. 
               
 
  
 
Fig-11: Variation of COD at different 
concentration of sample-1 
 
 
Fig-12: Variation of COD at different 
concentration of sample-2 
 
 
From above fig-9 it is observed that the DO value of the different concentration wastewater 
increases resulting from the use of water hyacinth with elapsed time but still not reaches the 
allowable limit. However the increasing rate of DO is approximately equal for four different 
concentrated wastewater. From fig-10 it is observed that the amount of sulphate of different 
concentrated wastewater decreases resulting from the use of water hyacinth. However the 
reduction rate of sulphate is higher in case of higher concentrated wastewater than that of 
lower concentrated wastewater. Similar case is occurred for nitrate, phosphate and 
organic matter in this treatment process. 
 
             
 
 1129 
  
Fig-13: Variation of DO at different 
concentration of sample-2 
 
Fig-14: Variation of Sulphate at different 
concentration of sample-2 
 
 
 
4. Conclusions  
 
In this study, it was observed that the characterized parameters of the influent wastewater were 
out of the allowable limit and disposing to the surface water body. After running the system, the 
COD value was reached to the allowable limit and the reduction of COD value is about 14~ 70% 
& 48~67% for sample-1&2 respectively. However the rate of reduction of COD is approximately 
equal for all of the concentration of wastewater. The values of TS & TDS were also reduced to 
allowable limit after about three weeks. The reduction of TS & TDS values is about 75~83%. 
Other parameters such as DO, nitrate, phosphate were changed but not reached to allowable limit. 
In the case of organic content the value is decreased in first two weeks and then increased. This 
increment is due to the rotten of matured water hyacinth and this also the cause to keep the DO 
under allowable limit. So a treatment process using water hyacinth as an aquatic system is 
necessary to reduce the environmental impact.   
 
Acknowledgements  
 
The author expresses his praise to Almighty Allah, who helped to complete the term paper 
successfully and highly grateful to my friends for their sincere cooperation and providing 
valuable information.  
 
References 
 
Aoi, T. & Hayashi, T. 1996, Nutrient removal by water lettuce (Pistia stratiotes). Water Sci. 
Tech. 34, 407-412. 
Chua, H. 1998 Bio-accumulation of environmental residues of rare earth elements in aquatic flora 
Eichhonia crassipes (Mart.) Solms. in Gaungdong Province of China. The Science of Total 
Environment 214, 79-85. 
De Casabianca, M.L. & Laugier, T. 1995 Eichhonia crassipes production on petroliferous 
wastewater: effects of salinity. Bioresource Technilogy 54, 39-43. 
Design Manual Sept 1988 Constructed Wetlands and Aquatic Plant Systems for Municipal 
Wastewater Treatment,  U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Research and 
Development, Center for Environmental Research Information, Cincinnati, OH 45268, pp-1. 
 1130 
Maine, M.A., Sune, N.L., Panigatti, M.C., & Pizarro, M.J. 1999 Relationships between water 
chemistry and macrophyte chemistry in lotic and lentic environment. Arch. Hydroboil.145 
(2),  129-145. 
Managing water shortages - the problem is people not climate, http://www.globe-
net.com/articles/2010/december/2/managing-water-shortages-the-problem-is-people,-not-
climate.aspx?sub=11 (Accessed on 02/25/2011). 
Perkin, J. & Hunter, C. 2000 Removal of enteric bacteria in surface flow constructed wetland in 
Yorkshire, England. Water Res. 34, 1941-1947.  
Peterson, S.B & Teal, M.J 1996 The role of the plants in ecologically engineered wastewater 
treatment systems; Ecological Engineering; pp: 137-148. 
Sim, C.H. 2003 The use of constructed wetlands for wastewater treatment. Water International- 
Malaysia Office, 24.  
Solutions for a Water-Short World, http://info.k4health.org/pr/m14/m14print.shtml (Accessed on 
02/25/2011). 
Stephenson, M., G. Turner, P. Pope, J. Colt, A. Knight, and G. Tchobanoglous. 1980, Publication 
No. 65, The Use and Potential of Aquatic Species for Wastewater Treatment. Pub. by 
California State Water Resources Control Board. 
Stowell, R., R. Ludwig, J. Colt, and G. Tchobanoglous 1980, Toward the Rational Design of 
Aquatic Treatment Systems. Presented at the American Society of Civil Engineers, Spring 
Convention, Portland, OR. April 14-18. 
Tchobanoglous, G. 1987, Aquatic Plant Systems for Wastewater Treatment: Engineering 
Considerations. 1987. In: Aquatic Plants for Water Treatment and Resource Recovery. 
Magnolia Publishing, Inc., Orlando, FL, pp. 27-48. 
Water for Life- Policy Framework, EU Water Initiative (International Cooperation) 
http://ec.europa.eu/research/water-initiative/framework_en.html (Accessed on 02/24/2011). 
Water Scarcity, http://regquery.bau.edu.jo/node/34 (Accessed on 02/25/2011). 
 
 
1131 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
THE EFFECT OF CHEMICAL ADMIXTURES ON THE GEOTECHNICAL 
PARAMETERS OF ORGANIC SOIL: A NEW STATISTICAL MODEL 
 
 
Islam M. Rafizul1, Md. Assaduzzaman2 and Muhammed Alamgir1 
 
 
ABSTRACT: The main focused of this study to investigate the effect of chemical admixtures on 
unconfined compressive strength(qu), liquid limit (wL) (at varying mixing water content), 
laboratory compaction properties in terms of optimum moisture content (wop) and maximum dry 
density (d) as well as organic content of stabilized soil. To these attempts, typical organic soil 
samples, from four selected locations were collected and hence prepared the stabilized soil in the 
laboratory by mixing of cement, lime and bentonite at varying content of 5, 10, 15, 20 and 25% 
of the dry mass of organic soil. Result reveals that the value of qu of stabilized soil was found to 
increase in relation to the increasing of admixtures content as well as the curing days. However, 
the wL of all the stabilized soils was found to decrease with increasing the admixture content and 
curing days. Here, it is interesting to note that, wL of stabilized soil decreases with the increases 
of admixtures content, however, for 100% mixing water soil; the wL was more than that of 50% 
mixing water condition. In contrast, the d increases, while, the wop decreases with the increasing 
of admixture content. Based on the laboratory results and using SPSS 16.0 a multiple regression 
model was developed, however, the reliability and accuracy of the developed model were 
checked by comparing the predicted values of qu against the measured values. Based on the 
regression analysis, it can be noted that the R2 were ranging from 0.726 to 0.965, 0.536 to 0.930 
0.909 to 0.984, for bentonite, lime and cement stabilized soil. Here, it can be depicted that the 
correlation coefficient R2 at 95% confidence interval is 0.914, meaning roughly that 91.4% of the 
variance in qu is explained by the model. This value is statistically significant and therefore 
suggested that the measured and predicted values of qu are comparable. 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Khulna region is situated at the southwestern part of Bangladesh near the world largest mangrove 
forest, Sundarbans. The sub-soil of this region consists of fine-grained soils with a considerable 
part of decomposed and semi-decomposed organic matter (Rafizul et al. 2010; Alamgir et al. 
2006). In this region, the soft soil deposit extends up to a considerable depth, as a result the recent 
alluvial deposits with organic composition creates problem to geotechnical engineers in designing 
economic foundations to construct the required infrastructure (Mahamud et al. 2007; Rafizul et 
al. 2007; Alamgir et al. 2001). The terms organic soils, used for describing soils with an organic 
                                                        
1 Department of Civil Engineering,  Khulna University of Engineering & Technology (KUET), 
Bangladesh. imrafizul@yahoo.com and alamgir63dr@yahoo.com  
2Building Development & Design Limited (bddI), Dhaka-1207,Bangladesh, asad_kuet@yahoo.com  
 
 
 
1132 
 
content, were once synonymous but organic soils is presently used for superficial deposits or soils 
that contain organic matter (Haut, 2004 and Rafizul et al. 2006). Organic soils are believed to be 
geotechnically problematic due to their very high compressibility, very low shear strength and 
difficult accessibility. The soils with organic content of greater than 20% are generally termed 
organic soils (Bujang et al. 2009 and Lam 1989). Organic soils are geo-mechnically problematic 
due to their high compressibility and low shear strength, hence suitable geomechnical design 
parameters and construction technique needed for this type of condition ground improvement. 
Organic soil represents the extreme form of soft soil deposits and it is subjected to instability, slip 
failure as well as massive primary and long term settlement, constructing of infra-structure on 
this layer (Alamgir 1996 and Porbaha 2000). Today the deep mixing method is accepted world-
wide as a soil improvement method which is performed to improve the strength, deformation 
properties and permeability of organic peat soil (Costsa 2008). It is based on mixing binders, such 
as cement, lime, bentonite, and other additives with the natural soil. On the other hand, chemical 
admixtures used for the stabilization of organic soil always chances the physical and engineering 
properties of soil, volume stability and strength characteristics (Bujang et al. 2005). 
   Chemical admixture always involves treatment of the soil with some kind of chemical 
compound, which when added to the soil would result in chemical reaction. The chemical 
reaction modifies or enhances the physical and engineering properties of a soil, such as, volume 
stability and strength. Chemical stabilized like cement, lime and bentonite has two folds effect on 
the soil characteristics of fluctuation, the clay particles are electrically attracted and aggregated 
with each other. This results in an increase in the effective size of the clay size aggregation. Such 
aggregation converts clay into the mechanical equivalent of fine silt. Also, a strong chemical 
bonding force develops between the individual particles in such aggregation. The chemical 
bonding depends upon the type of stabilizer employed (Bujang et al. 2005). The physical and 
mechanical properties of stabilized soils depend on several factors, mainly the properties of base 
material and the environmental aspects. The  strength development  of admixture stabilized  
soil  depends on many factors such as type and properties of soil, quantity and type of 
admixture, soil moisture content, mixing and compaction method, condition and curing time, 
temperature, soil minerals and used admixture. 
   The main focus of this study formulated as, (i) investigate the effect of chemical admixture 
and admixtures content on the qu ; (ii) investigate the effect of curing period on qu; (iii) change of 
wL in relation to the variation of mixing water content, admixtures content and organic content; 
(iv) the effect of organic content on qu ; (v) change of compaction properties at varying 
admixtures content and organic content as well as (vi) develop a new model of linear regression 
analysis through SPSS, based on measured qu of stabilized soil in the laboratory. 
 
2. Materials and Methodology 
 
The preparation stabilized soil through chemical admixture (cement, lime and bentonite) in the 
laboratory within a short elapsed time is very difficult, therefore, a mechanical study of cement, 
lime and bentonite stabilized soil was occasionally carried out in the laboratory to unserstand the 
mechanical properties of stabilized soils (Yamadera 1999). Organic soil samples were collected 
for laboratory routine test at a depth of 10, 7.5, 5.5 and 12 ft, from the existing ground surface from 
the four selected location in Khulna region, namely, Teligati, Rangpur, Sonadanga as well as Khulna 
University campus, respectively. The physical and index properties of the collected soil sample 
were investigated in the laboratory through the standards methods (ASTM 2004) and presented in 
the Table 1. 
 
 
1133 
 
Table 1 Physical and index properties of organic soils used in this study 
 
Properties Teligati Rangpur Sonadanga  KU campus 
Water content, w (%) 96 87 65 126 
Liquid limit, wL (%) 145 122 95 170 
Plastics limit, wP (%) 65 57 45 80 
Plasticity index, Ip (%) 80 65 50 90 
Specific gravity, Gs 1.23 1.46 1.71 1.12 
Organic content, OC (%) 66 53 32 71 
 
Cement particle is heterogeneous substance, containing tri-calcium silicate (C3S), di-calcium 
silicate (C2S), tri-calcium aluminate (C3A), and solid solution described as tetra-calcium alumino-
ferrite (C4AF). Di-calcium silicate (C2S) is responsible for the progressive strength of cement. In 
this study for preparing the stabilized soil in the laboratory, the amounts of cement, lime and 
bentonite as percentage of dry soil mass, were ranging of 5- 25%. The basic ingredients of 
cement used in this study obtained from routine laboratory test are given in Table 2. Moreover, 
the basic ingredients of used lime and bentonite used in this study are also given in Table 3. 
 
Table 2 Physical properties of cement used in this study 
 
Physical properties Values 
Normal consistency (%) 22.40 
Initial setting time 2 hours 10 minutes 
Final setting time 4 hours 50 minutes 
Fineness (%) 0.60 
                 
             Table 3 Basic ingredients of lime and bentonite used in this study 
 
 
A sequence of test is performing in order to observe the effect of cement, lime and bentonite on 
the physical and mechanical properties of stabilized organic soil. The collected undisturbed 
samples were first brought to the laboratory and spreader it over the floor to get air- dry soil 
samples. After drying, then soil chucks were broken and grinded by using wooden hammer as 
fine as possible without applying unnecessary pressure. The soil powder was passed through 
# 40 standard sieves to avoid the chuck. Air dry soil powder free from any chuck of 
foreign materials was used as the main ingredients to prepare stabilized soil-
cement/lime/bentonite specimen. The water content of air-dry soil sample was measured at a 
range of 3.75%- 5.5%. The mixing was done properly to get a uniform mixture of soil cement, 
lime and bentonite and to prepare a uniform paste free from lumps and other foreign particles. The 
soil paste was then poured in to the cylindrical plastic mould by the help of fingers so that no air 
Basic ingredients of  
lime 
Composition 
(%) 
Basic ingredients of 
bentonite 
Composition 
 (%) 
Calcium oxide 50 Magnasium 25 
Magnesium  oxide 35 Aluminium 35 
Aluminum oxide 3 Silica  67 
Silica 22 Iron  3 
 
 
1134 
 
voids entrapped into the soil sample. After six hour the specimen removed taken out from the 
cylindrical mould and it was tightly wrapped in polythene bags to prevent the loss of moisture 
from the stabilized soil due to evaporation. After 24 hours, the wrapped specimens were placed 
under water in the room temperature until testing at the designated rest period of 1, 3, 7, 14 and 
28 days. Here, it can be noted that to investigate the effect of chemical admixture through the 
liquid limit test, the samples were prepared in the laboratory by mixing of water content at 100 
and 50%. Moreover, for investigate the laboratory compaction properties of stabilized soil, 
samples were compacted in accordance to the standard proctor test for cement and bentonite, 
modified proctor test for lime admixture. The methodology followed for the laboratory 
investigations as presented in Figure 1. 
                                                                                                                                           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                            
                     Figure 1 Flow chart of laboratory investigation 
 
 
3.  Results and Discussions 
 
The effect of chemical admixture in terms of admixture content and curing period of compressive 
strength, liquid limit as well as the laboratory compaction properties on the stabilized soil prepared in 
the laboratory were analyzed and hence discussed in following. 
3.1. The effect of admixture content and curing period on unconfined compressive strength 
The strength behavior have been established by conducting unconfined compression test on 
stabilized soil samples prepared in the laboratory using cement, lime and bentonite at varying content 
from 5 to 25% for the rest period of 7 to 28 days as shown in Figures 2 to 7. Moreover, studies are 
carried out to examine the effect of chemical admixtures in terms of admixture content and curing 
period as well as the influence of organic content on qu of stabilized soil. The effect of cement 
Collection of Disturbed Organic Soil Samples 
Crushed of Air-dried Samples in to Powder Form 
Preparation of Cement, Lime and Bentonite stabilized Soil at 
varying content of 5, 10, 15, 20 and 25%. 
50 and 100% water was 
added of dry soil mass. 
Keep in polythene bag for 
curing at different days 
Stranded proctor test is consider 
for cement and modified proctor 
for lime and bentonite 
Make sample and keep in 
polythene bag for curing 
under water at room 
temperature at different days 
Unconfined test Compaction test Liquid limit test 
 
 
1135 
 
Figure 4 Compressive strength of lime stabilized soil 
at varying organic content after rest period of 7 days. 
0
50
100
150
200
250
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
U
nc
on
fin
ed
 co
m
pr
es
siv
e 
str
en
gt
h,
 q
u
(k
N
/m
2 )
Lime content (%)
Curing period (days)=7
32
53
66
71
Organic content,  OC(%) =
Figure 5 Compressive strength of lime stabilized soil 
at varying organic content after rest period of 28 days. 
 
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
U
nc
on
fin
ed
 co
m
pr
es
siv
e s
tre
ng
th
, q
u 
(k
N
/m
2 )
Lime content (%)
Curing period (days)=28 
32
53
66
71
Organic content, OC(%) =
0
50
100
150
200
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
U
nc
on
fin
ed
 co
m
pr
es
siv
e 
st
re
ng
th
, q
u
(k
N
/m
2 )
Bentonite content (%)
Curing period (days)=7 
32
53
66
71
Organic content, OC(%)  =
Figure 6 Compressive strength of bentonite stabilized 
soil at varying organic content after rest period of 7 days. 
0
50
100
150
200
250
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
U
nc
on
fi
ne
d 
co
m
pr
es
si
ve
 s
tr
en
gt
h,
 q
u
(k
N
/m
2 )
Bentonite content (%)
Curing period (days)=28 
32
53
66
71
Organic content, OC(%) = 
Figure 7 Compressive strength of bentonite stabilized 
soil at varying organic content after rest period of 28 
days. 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0
100
200
300
400
500
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
un
co
nf
in
ed
 c
om
pr
es
si
ve
 s
tr
en
gt
h,
 q
u
(k
N
/m
2 )
Cement content (%)
Curing period (days) =7 
32
53
66
71
Organic content, OC(%) =
Figure 2 Compressive strength of cement stabilized soil 
at varying organic content after rest period of 7 days.  
 
Figure 3 Compressive strength of cement stabilized soil 
at varying organic content after rest period of 28 days.  
 
 
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
U
nc
on
fi
ne
d
 c
om
pr
es
si
ve
 s
tr
en
gt
h,
 q
u
(k
N
/m
2
)
Cement content(%)
Curing period (days)=28 
32
53
66
71
Organic content,OC(%) =
 
 
1136 
 
content varying from 5 to 25%, on qu of cement stabilized soils at varying organic content from 32 
to 71%  at rest period 7 and 28 days after prepared as shown in Figure 2 and Figure 3, respectively. 
Figures 2 and 3 reveals that the values of qu increases in relation to the increasing of elapsed period 
of cement stabilized soil for all the percentages of organic content. 
 
Moreover, result shows that qu for 32 % organic soil was higher, while, 71% organic soil contains the 
lowest qu. In contrast, Figure 4 and Figure 5 represent the effect of lime content on qu of stabilized 
soil at rest period 7 and 28 days, respectively. However, the effect of bentonite content on qu of 
stabilized soil at varying organic content of rest period 7 and 28 days are shown in Figures 6 and 7, 
respectively. Here, it can be noted that the higher qu was obtained at rest period 28 days for all the 
stabilized soil in compare to 1, 3, 7, and 14 days. Figures 2 to 7 shows that the qu decreases with the 
increases of organic content of stabilized soil. The variation of qu mainly depends on the amount of 
organic content are present in the soil. High organic content stabilized soil show low strength 
than less organic content stabilized soil (Alamgir et al. 2001).  
 
3.2. The Effect of Admixture Content and Curing Period on The Liquid Limit of Stabilized 
Soils 
 
In the laboratory, to investigate the effect of admixture content, curing period and organic content 
on wL of soil, the stabilized soil samples were prepared with mixing water content of 100 and 
50%. The variation of liquid limit (wL) in relation to the increasing of elapsed period from sample 
preparation at the varying percentages of cement, lime and bentonite content of 5, 10, 15, 20 and 
25%, is evident in Figures 8 to 13 and based on Figures 8 to 13 it was observed that the values of 
wL decreases with the increasing of elapsed period of stabilized soil. Moreover, the value of wL 
was found lower at 100% mixing water than that of 50%. However, it was not possible to conduct 
any more wL test after 7-days curing as the soil samples have become too hard. Here, it is 
interesting to note that for a particular soil-cement/lime/ bentonite mixed, there is a better 
reduction in wL when more water is made available for the chemical reaction to take place. 
 
3.3. The effect of compaction on maximum dry density of stabilized soils 
A series of test is conducted to investigate the effect of cement on the compaction characteristics 
of peat soil. These samples were compacted in accordance to the standard proctor test for cement 
and bentonite, modified proctor test for lime admixture whereby the samples were compacted in 
three layers with a 5.5 Ib hammer that delivers 25 blows to each layer. As shown, the addition of 
cement/lime/bentonite has an influence in reducing the optimum water content and increasing the 
maximum dry unit weight of the organic soil. The variation of dry unit weight  and optimum 
moisture content with the addition of varying percentage cement 5%,10%, 15%, 20% and 25% 
are evident in Figure 14~19. Based on figures, it was observed that the values of dry unit weight 
of cement/lime/bentonite mixing organic soil increases, while, the optimum moisture content 
decreases with the increasing of cement/lime/bentonite content. However, the value of dry unit 
weight decreases and optimum moisture content increases with the increasing of organic content. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1137 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8 Effect of cement content at varying mixing 
water and curing period on liquid limit of stabilized 
30
45
60
75
90
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Li
qu
id
lim
it,
 W
L
(%
)
Curing period (days)
Organic content,OC(%)=32
20%/(50% water) 25%/(50% water)
20%/(100% water) 25%/(100% water)
Cement content(mixing water)
35
55
75
95
115
135
155
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Li
qu
id
 li
m
it,
 W
L 
(%
)
Curing period(days)
Organic content,OC(%)=66
20%/(50% water) 25%/(50% water)
20%/(100% water) 25%/(100% water)
Lime content(mixing water)
Figure 11 Effect of lime content at varying mixing water 
and curing period on liquid limit of stabilized soil. 
Figure 9 Effect of cement content at varying mixing 
water and curing period on liquid limit of stabilized soil. 
35
55
75
95
115
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Li
qu
id
 li
m
it,
 W
L
(%
)
Curing  period (days)
Organic content,OC(%)= 53
5%/(50% water) 10%/(50% water) 15%/(50% water)
5%/(100% water) 10%/(100% water) 15%/(100% water)
Cement content (mixing water)
Figure 10 Effect of lime content at varying mixing water 
and curing period on liquid limit of stabilized soil. 
45
65
85
105
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
Li
qu
id
 li
m
it,
W
L
(%
)
Curing period (days)
Organic content,OC(%)=32
5%/(50% water) 10%/(50% water) 15%/(50% water)
5%/(100% water) 10%/(100% water) 15%/(100% water)
Lime content (mixing water)
35
55
75
95
115
135
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
Li
qu
id
 li
m
it,
 W
L 
(%
)
Curing period (days)
Organic content,OC(%)=53
20%/(50% water) 25%/(50% water)
20%/(100% water) 25%/(100% water)
Figure 12 Effect of bentonite content at varying mixing 
water and curing period on liquid limit of stabilized soil. 
Bentonite content (mixing water)
75
95
115
135
155
175
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
L
iq
ui
d 
lim
it,
 W
L
(%
)
Curing period (days)
Organic content, OC(%)=71
5%/(50% water) 10%/(50% water) 15%/(50% water)
5%/(100% water) 10%/(100% water) 15%/(100% water)
Figure 13 Effect of bentonite content at varying mixing 
water and curing period on liquid limit of stabilized soil. 
Bentonite content (mixing water)
 
 
1138 
 
Figure 15 Effect of cement content on dry 
density of stabilized soil at varying organic 
1000
1100
1200
1300
1400
1500
15 25 35 45 55 65 75 85
D
ry
  u
ni
t 
w
ei
gh
t (
kg
/m
3 )
Moisture content (%)
Organic content, OC(%)= 66
5
10
15
20
25Cement content (%)=
1000
1100
1200
1300
1400
1500
1600
1700
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
D
ry
 u
ni
t w
ei
gh
t (
kg
/m
3 )
Moister content (%)
Organic content,OC(%)=53
5
10
15
20
25
Cement content (%)=
Figure 14 Effect of cement content on dry density of 
stabilized soil at varying organic content. 
1100
1200
1300
1400
1500
1600
1700
1800
1900
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
D
ry
 u
ni
t w
ei
gh
t (
K
g/
m
3 )
Moisture content (%)
Organic content ,OC(%)=53
5
10
15
20
25
Lime content (%)=
Figure 18 Effect of cement content on dry 
density of stabilized soil at varying organic 
800
900
1000
1100
1200
30 40 50 60 70 80 90
D
ry
 u
ni
t 
w
ei
gh
t (
kg
/m
3 )
Moisture content (%)
Organic content ,OC(%)=71
5
10
15
20
25
Bentonite content (%)=
Figure 19 Effect of cement content on dry 
density of stabilized soil at varying organic 
875
975
1075
1175
1275
1375
25 35 45 55 65 75 85
D
ry
 u
ni
t w
ei
gh
t (
K
g/
m
3 )
Moisture content (%)
Organic content,OC (%)=71
5
10
15
20
25
Cement content (%)=
Figure 16 Effect of cement content on dry density of 
stabilized soil at varying organic content. 
1000
1100
1200
1300
1400
1500
1600
20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
D
ry
 u
ni
t w
ei
gh
t (
K
g/
m
3 )
Moisture content (%)
Organic content, OC(%)=66
5
10
15
20
25
Lime content (%)=
Figure 17 Effect of cement content on dry density 
of stabilized soil at varying organic content. 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1139 
 
4. Regression Model Analysis  
 
Based on the laboratory results and using SPSS 16.0 statistic program a linear regression model 
was developed which correlates the compressive strength (qu) of cement stabilized soil to the five 
variables (water content, w (%), liquid limit, wL (%), cement content, C (%), sand content, S (%) 
and curing time, CT (days)), where, a1, a2, a3, a4, a5 and a6 are coefficient of regression line as 
follows: 
 
  qu= a1+a2 (w)+a3 (wL)+a4 (C)+a5(CT)+a6 (S)                                      (1) 
 
In order to obtain a more accurate regression model, the curing time was left out as a descriptor 
variable in the regression equation. The model that gives the best correlation is of the following 
from again. 
 
   qu= a1+a2 (w)+a3 (wL)+a4 (C)+a5 (S)                                           (2) 
 
The reliability and accuracy of the model were checked by comparing the predicted values of 
compressive strength from this model and the measured values, and computing the correlation 
coefficient. The black dot line in the Figure 21 to 23 represents the line of perfect equality. The 
correlation coefficient (R2) at 95% confidence interval all values are nearly same. In this study, 
water content, liquid limit, admixture content and sand content are consider as independent 
variables, measured strength are consider as a dependent variable.  
 
4.1. Regression Model of Stabilized Soils At Different Curing period     
              
For regression analysis, water content, liquid limit, cement content and sand content are 
considered as independent variables, while, the measured strength are considered as a dependent 
variable is evident in Figure 20. Moreover, to depict the validity of the measured compressive 
strength against the computed values, the following equations 3 and 4, for 3 and 14 days curing 
period, respectively, was developed using the unstandardized coffficients as presented in Figure 
20.  
     
   qu = 1225.115-30.885(w)+ 8.150(wL)+5.951(C)-59.254(S)                          (3) 
    
   qu =1050.763-25.221(w)+5.256 (wL)+4.501(C)-52.264(S)                          (4) 
 
The cross plot of the values of computed compressive strength obtained from the application of 
equations 3 and 4 against the measured values using the linear regression model. Figure 
20.illustrate a plot of the values of computed compressive strength with measured values using 
the linear regression model. The black dot straight line in the figure represents the line of perfect 
equality, where the values being compared are exactly equal. The correlation coefficient (R2) at 
95% confidence interval was 0.955 (Figure 21 (a)) and 0.984 (Figure 21 (b)), meaning roughly 
that 95.5 and 98.4%, for 1 and 14 days curing, respectively, of the variance in compressive 
strength is explained by the model. This value is statistically significant and therefore suggests 
that the measured and calculated values of compressive strength are comparable 
 
 
 
1140 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 20 Variables and coefficients for model of SPSS analysis 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The cross plot of the values of computed compressive strength obtained from the application of 
equations 5 and 6 against the measured values using the linear regression model. Here, it can be 
noted that the values of computed compressive strength with measured values using the linear 
regression model is depicted in Figure 22. The red dot straight line in the figure represents the 
line of perfect equality, where the values being compared are exactly equal. The correlation 
coefficient (R2) at 95% confidence interval was 0.93 (Figure 22 (a)) and 0.922 (Figure 22 (b)), 
meaning roughly that 93.0 and 92.2%, for 3 and 14 days curing, respectively, of the variance in 
compressive strength is explained by the model. 
    qu =271.366-4.3.350(w)+1.091(wL)+2.315(C)-49.414(S)                    (5) 
    qu=446.657-6.208(w)+2.322(wL)+3.619(C)-59.742(S)                       (6)        
 
                                   
 
(b) 
Figure 21 Cross plot of measured compressive strength and computed values for cement 
admixture (a) 3 days and (b) 14 days. 
(a) 
 
 
1141 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The cross plot of the values of computed compressive strength obtained from the application of 
equations 7 and 8 against the measured values using the linear regression model. Here, it can be 
noted that the values of computed compressive strength with measured values using the linear 
regression model is depicted in Figure 23. The red dot straight line in the figure represents the 
line of perfect equality, where the values being compared are exactly equal. The correlation 
coefficient (R2) at 95% confidence interval was 0.725 (Figure 23 (a)) and 0.984 (Figure 23 (b)), 
meaning roughly that 72.5 and 98.4%, for 1 and 14 days curing, respectively, of the variance in 
compressive strength is explained by the model. 
     qu =745.548-10.699(w)+1.781(wL)+1.194(C)-106.089(S)                        (7)                                              
     qu=264.740-3.291(w)+0.694(wL)+0.108(C)-6.649(S)                            (8)                                          
    
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(b) 
Figure 23 Cross plot of measured compressive strength and computed values for bentonite 
admixture (a) 1 day and (b) 14 days. 
(a) 
(a) 
Figure 22 Cross plot of measured compressive strength and computed values for lime admixture 
(a) 3 days and (b) 28 days. 
(b) 
 
 
1142 
 
5. Conclusion 
 
From the results of this study it can be concluded that addition of the chemical admixture, cement 
lime and bentonite, can improve the engineering properties of stabilized soils, especially after a 
long curing period. The liquid limit of stabilized soil was found to decrease with increase in the 
cement, lime and bentonite content, however, for 100% mixing water soil; the liquid limit was 
more than 50% mixing water condition. The soil maximum dry density was found to increase 
while the optimum water content was found to decrease with increase of admixtures content. The 
unconfined compressive strength of soil was found to increase significantly with increase in 
cement, lime and bentonite content, especially after a long curing period. However, it was also 
found that higher organic content and degree of humification of the soil negate the positive effect 
of the cement, lime and bentinite in improving the mechanical properties of soil. The predicted 
unconfined compressive strength from developed model was almost same as the laboratory 
measured value and the degree of accuracy was more reliable. The higher strength is obtained 
from samples that have been cured for 28 days compared with 1, 3, 7, 14-days cured samples and 
also obtained that cement stabilized samples shows high strength than lime and bentonite 
stabilized organic soil samples.  
 
References 
 Alamgir, M. (1996),Analysis of soft ground reinforced by columnar in collusions. Ph.D. 
thesis, Department of Civil Engineering, Saga University, Saga, Japan. 
 Alamgir, M., Zaher, S.M.,Haque, M.A. and Kabir, M.H. (2001). Performance of some 
ground improvement methods recently practiced in the soft ground of Bangladesh. Proc. 
of the Indian Geotechnical Conference, 14–16 December 2001, Indore.  
 Alamgir, M. Rafizul, I. M. and Bashar, M. A.(2006). Physical Properties of Reconstituted 
Organic Soils at Khulna Region of Bangladesh, 59th Canadian Geotechnical Conf. Oct. 1-
4, 2006,Vancouver,Canada, pp.1-6. 
 ASTM (2004). Annual Book of ASTM Standard: Soil and Rock (1). D420- D4914. 
Vol.04.08 and 04.09, Section 4. 
 Bujang et al. (2005).Effect of chemical Admixture on the Properties of Peat soil, 
Engineering   Journal of Applied Sciences, America.  
 Bujang et al. (2009)  Experimental investigation on geomechanical properties of 
tropical organic soils and peat. Engineering   Journal of Applied Sciences, America. 
2(1): 184-188, ISSN 1941-7020 
 Costas A. Anagnostopouls, Maria Chatziangelou, (2008). Compressive strength of 
cement stabilized soils: A New Statistical Model. EJGE, Vol. 13, Bund. B 
 Huat, B.B.K., (2004). Organic and peat soil Engineering. University Putra Malaysia, 
Press. Malaysia: Serdang. 
 Lam , S. K.,(1989). Quaternary  geology  of Sibu town area , Sarawak , Malaysia. 
Geological  Survey Malaysia. pp:11-23 
 Mahamud, M.A., Alamgir, M., Rafizul, I. M. and Gazi, M. A. H. (2007). Behaviour of 
Soft Ground Improved by Geotextile Reinforced Compacted Sand Bed, Proc. of the IS on 
Geotechnical Engg., Ground Improvement and Geosynthetics for Security and 
Environmental Preservation, 6 to 7 Dec. 2007 at Bangkok, Thailand, pp.457-467. 
 
 
1143 
 
 Porbaha, A. (2000) “State-of-the art in deep mixing technology: Design considerations”. 
Ground   Improvement, Vol.4, pp 111-125. 
 Rafizul, I. M., Alamgir, M. and Bashar, M. A. (2010) Characterization and Verification of 
Engineering Properties of Organic soil with the Emphasis on Reconstituted Soils, Procs. 
of the Bangladesh Geotechnical Conference, BGS 2010, November 4-5, 2010, BGS-2010, 
Hotel Sheraton, Dhaka, Bangladesh, pp.109-115. 
 Rafizul, I. M., Alamgir, M. and Bashar, M. A. (2009), Strength and Compaction 
Properties of Reconstituted Organic Soils of a Selected Site in Khulna Region, Procs. of 
the Bangladesh Geotechnical Conference, BGS 2009, December 17, 2009, BGS-2009, 
Dept. of CE, BUET, Dhaka, Bangladesh, pp.109-115. 
 Rafizul, I. M., Alamgir, M. and Mahamud, M.A. (2007). Effect of Pre-consolidation 
Pressure on the Geotechnical Properties of Reconstituted Organic Soils of Khulna Region, 
Proc. of the IS on Geotechnical Engg., Ground Improvement and Geosynthetics for 
Security and Environmental Preservation, 6 to 7 Dec. 2007 at Bangkok, Thailand, pp. 
541-549, 2007. 
 Yamadera, A (1999). Microstructural study of geotechnical characteristics of marine 
clays., PhD. Thesis, Dept. of CE, Saga University, Japan. 
 
 
  
1144 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
 CHARACTERIZATION AND REMOVAL OF POLLUNAT IN LANDFILL 
LYSIMETER LEACHATE USING CHEMICAL COAGULANTS  
 
 
Islam M. Rafizul1, Muhammed Alamgir1 and Imran Rahaman2 
 
 
ABSTRACT: Landfill leachate is considered as heavily polluted, which has extremely high 
pollution load that may pollute subsoil and ground water. Special attention must be paid to its 
efficient treatment and disposal. In this study, performance of coagulation process was examined 
for leachate, sampling from landfill lysimeter at KUET campus, Bangladesh. The coagulation 
process consisted of ferric chloride (FeCl3) poly-aluminum chloride (PAC) and ferrous sulphate 
(FeSO4)  in various dosages and pH values. In the laboratory, standard coagulation-flocculation 
experiments were performed in a conventional Jar-test apparatus. Result showed that FeCl3 was 
performed to optimum reduction at optimum coagulant dosage (OpCD) of 1.5g/500mL at pH 7 
and 110 rpm mixing speed, while PAC and FeSO4 at OpCD of 2.0g/500mL and 1.5g/500mL, 
correspondingly, at pH 7 with the same mixing speed.  Experimental result reveals that FeCl3 was 
found to be effective as coagulant in leachate treatment, prior to biological treatment. Moreover, 
FeCl3
 
was found to be the preferred chemical compared to PAC and FeSO4 because this chemical 
was able to give more reduction than PAC and FeSO4. Here, it can be noted that, after reducing 
the relevant pollutant from leachate hence compared with the standard tools for discharging the 
leachate in the water bodies available in the literature. 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
MSW refers to the materials discarded in the urban areas for which municipalities are held 
responsible for collection, transport and final disposal (Rafizul et al. 2009). Landfilling is the 
most common technique for MSW disposal. Landfill leachate is a heavily polluted wastewater 
which has high potential to pollute subsoil and ground water (Imran et al. 2011). Although 
different natural and synthetic liners are used to prevent the movement of leachate into the 
ground water, no landfill liner can capture the entire generated leachate. Leachate is one of the 
major problems to overcome in managing the landfill. The collection and treatment of leachate 
has become common practice in order to prevent environmental pollution (Li et al. 1999 and 
                                                        
1 Department of Civil Engineering, Khulna University of Engineering & Technology (KUET), Bangladesh, 
E-mail: imrafizul@yahoo.com and alamgir63dr@yahoo.com. 
2Project Engineer, Trust Alliance Technology Limited (TATL), Dhaka-1212, Bangladesh (E-mail: 
mirza.ce31@gmail.com) 
 
  
1145 
Wichitsathian et al. 2004). Therefore, studies for the development of viable technologies for 
leachate treatment are important. Leachates present considerable variations in both volumetric 
flow and chemical composition (Tatsi et al. 2003) due to the variations in the composition of 
deposited solid wastes, landfill age, hydrogeology of landfill site, specific climate conditions, 
moisture routing through the landfill (Chu et al. 1994) and design and operation of the landfill 
(Aziz et al. 2004). Moreover, leachate is generated from MSW due to precipitation, surface run-
off, and infiltration or intrusion of groundwater percolating through a landfill (Ntampou et al. 
2006). It can cause great environmental problems if it gets into underground water, especially 
because it has organic matter (both biodegradable and non-biodegradable carbon) ammonia-
nitrogen, heavy metals, chlorinated organic and inorganic salts.  
Several wastewater treatment processes have been applied to treat landfill leachate: aerobic 
and anaerobic biological degradation, chemical oxidation, chemical precipitation, coagulation-
flocculation, activated carbon adsorption and membrane processes (Amokarane et al. 1997). 
Rivas et al. (2002) reported that, leachate treatment technologies can be classified into three 
major groups: (a) leachate channeling: recycling, lagooning, etc., (b) biodegradation: aerobic and 
anaerobic processes and (c) chemical and physical methods: oxidation, adsorption, etc. Biological 
processes are especially efficient in the treatment of young landfill leachates that are rich in 
volatile fatty acids. As landfills get older than l0 years, leachates become increasingly stabilized 
and hence biological degradation is rarely suited for their effective treatment (Amokarane et al. 
1997). High concentrations of ammoniacal nitrogen constitute a limiting factor. Physico-chemical 
processes are used for the pretreatment of young leachate to make it amenable to biological 
treatment, and to hydrolyze some refractory organic compounds found in leachate from older 
landfills (Chian 1977). Biological treatment is primarily used to stabilize degradable organic 
matter in the young and middle aged leachates. In practice, a combination of physical, chemical 
and biological methods are usually used for the effective treatment of landfill leachate since it is 
difficult to obtain satisfactory effluent water quality by using any one of these methods alone 
(Kargi and Pamukoglu 2003).Coagulation and flocculation is one of the widely used physico-
chemical methods of water and wastewater treatment. Coagulation-flocculation, as a treatment 
process in leachate treatment, is often recommended for removing pollutant parameters from 
stabilized leachate (Rivas et al. 2003 and Beauchesnea et al. 2005). Common coagulants used for 
leachate treatment include aluminum sulfate (alum), ferrous sulfate, ferric chloride and ferric 
chloro-sulfate (Amokrane et al. 1997). Iron salts are generally more efficient than aluminum 
ones. The present study was conducted to evaluate the suitability of coagulation-flocculation as 
the physico-chemical methods using the chemical coagulants of FeCl3, PAC and FeSO4 for the 
treatment of leachate which collected from leachate collection chamber of sanitary landfill 
lysimeter at KUET campus, Khulna, Bangladesh. At the initial stage, the optimum dosage of the 
used different coagulants was determined for the removal of relevant parameters then these 
optimum doses were selected for the treatment of leachate at the ranges of pH values of 4 to 9. In 
the laboratory through standard methods, analysis was performed on the leachate samples and 
several parameters were measured and monitored. The main objectives of this study as reveals: 
(i) to determine the characteristics of untreated leachate; (ii) to study the effectiveness of treating 
leachate using: FeCl3, PAC and FeSO4 and (iii) to compare the efficiencies of the used chemical 
coagulants to reduce the inorganic compounds and metals concentration.  
  
 
 
  
1146 
2. Materials and Laboratory Investigations 
 
2.1 Analytical methods for the assessment of leachate 
 
This research concentrates on the leachate generated from deposited MSW in landfill lysimeter at 
KUET campus, Bangladesh. Rafizul et al. (2009) reported that three landfill lysimeters designed 
as A, B and C were designed and hence constructed where three different situations were 
considered. The deposited MSW into each landfill lysimeter mainly consists of 93 (w/w) organic 
(food and vegetables), 3 (w/w) of plastic/polythene and 2 (w/w) of leather/rubber and 2 (w/w) of 
others. The organic and moisture content of the deposited MSW was found as 52% and 65%, 
respectively, and the total volume was 2.80m3 (height 1.6m) with a manual compaction to 
achieve the unit weight of 1,064kg/m3. Moreover, a leachate collection tank (3.68x1.56x1.64m) 
accommodating four separate leachate discharge pipes in the temporary collection and storage 
containers, were constructed using 250mm thick brick. 
 
Table 1 Characteristics of raw leachate from landfill lysimeter 
 
Characteristics Range Mean* 
Inorganic and organic compound   
 pH 6.14-8.0 7.31 
 Turbidity (NTU) 55-201 106 
 Leachate colour (Pt-Co) 1450-2340 2190 
 Chloride (mg/L) 1150-3580 2395 
 Total suspended solid (TSS) (mg/L) 18-1390 750 
 Hardness (mg/L)  1000-10000 2372 
 Alkalinity (mg/L) 980-10000 2930 
 Chemical oxygen demand (COD) 
(mg/L) 
160-800 510 
 Conductivity(mS/cm) 3.10-24.70 9.38 
Metal concentrations   
 Calcium (Ca) (mg/L) 153-256 214 
 Potassium (K) (mg/L) 856-1764 1444 
 Sodium (Na) (mg/L) 1012-2212 1489 
 Magnesium (Mg) (mg/L) 127-540 227 
 Iron (Fe) (mg/L) 1.80-82.6 25.0 
Heavy metal concentrations  
 Cadmium (Cd) (mg/L) 0.04-0.105 0.043 
 Nickel (Ni) (mg/L) 0.045-0.09 0.058 
 Zinc (Zn) (mg/L) 0.10-1.27 0.595 
 Copper (Cu) (mg/L) 0.04-0.97 0.213 
 Chromium (Cr) (mg/L) 0.01-0.08 0.06 
 Manganese (Mn) (mg/L) 0.80-8.50 4.40 
 Lead (Pb) (mg/L) 0.12-0.476 0.235 
* Average of 4 samples taken between 1st July and 30th August 2010 
Raw leachate was taken from the leachate collection chamber for laboratory analysis to establish 
the mean characteristics of leachate. Leachate samples were analyzed for physico-chemical 
  
1147 
parameters of pH by pH meter (HACH, Model No. Sens ion 156), chloride by titration using 
silver nitrate, conductivity by conductivity meter (HACH, Model No. Sens ion 5), alkalinity and 
hardness by titration, TSS by manually, COD by closed  reflexive method, turbidity using 
turbidity meter and colour using spectrophotometer (HACH; DR/2400) in accordance with the 
Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater (APHA, 1998). However, the 
Ca, Na, K and Mg ions were determined using flame atomic absorption spectrophotometer 
(VARIAN; AA/2400). In addition, Heavy metals viz., Cu, Zn, Cd, Ni and Pb were analyzed 
using spectrophotometer (HACH; DR/2400). Table 1 shows the leachate characteristics resulting 
from four samplings at two weeks interval for about 2 months from 1st July-30th August 2010. 
 
2.2 Coagulation and flocculation 
 
Coagulation-flocculation experiments were performed in a conventional Jar-test apparatus 
equipped with six backers using three types of chemical coagulants namely FeCl3, PAC and 
FeSO4. For the jar-test experiment, leachate samples were removed from the cold room and were 
conditioned for about 1 hour under ambient temperature. Sample container was thoroughly 
shaken for re-suspension of settled solids. 500 mL of raw leachate was transferred into the 1-litre 
beakers with the height of 15 cm and internal diameter of 10 cm. Leachate samples were 
subjected to jar-test after pH adjustment and the pre-selected chemical coagulant addition. The 
experimental procedure consisted of three subsequent stages; initial rapid mixing stage of 3 min 
at 110 rpm, following slow mixing stage of 25min at 40 rpm and final settling step for 30 min. 
The pH of leachate was adjusted to the desired levels by addition of the appropriate amounts of 
6N sodium hydroxide or 6N sulfuric acid. After the settling period, the supernatant was 
withdrawn from the beaker and was checked by chemical analysis. The withdrawal of sample 
was accomplished from a point about 2cm below the liquid level in the beaker by a pipette.  A 
study established by Ebeling et al. (2003) stated that the combined of coagulation-flocculation 
studies are carried out in usual jar test equipment. The adding of coagulant in leachate, adjusted 
of pH to the desired levels, mixing speed for Jar-test apparatus in the laboratory were trailed 
based on the procedure followed by Ebeling et al. (2003).   
 
 
3. Results and Discussions 
 
3.1 Chemical coagulant at varying concentrations 
 
Experiments were conducted using FeCl3, PAC and FeSO4 at  OpCD for the removal of inorganic 
compounds in terms of turbidity, colour, COD, TSS as well as metal concentrations of Ca, K, Na 
and Mg and heavy metal of Cu, Zn, Cd, Ni and Pb. However, the effect of various dosages using 
coagulants and pH was also investigated and hence discussed in followings. 
 
3.1.1 Treatment with FeCl3 at different concentration 
After treating leachate with FeCl3 at varying dosages, the concentration of inorganic compounds, 
metal and heavy metal was observed and shown in Table 2. However, percentage reduction of 
pollutant in relation to the increasing of FeCl3 dosages was studied and presented in Figure 1-3. 
Based on Figure 1-3, it can be noted that the increasing trend of reduction in relation to the 
  
1148 
increasing of FeCl3 dosages continued approached the OpCD after which the reduction rate was 
started to reduce gradually. The similar trend was also observed by Hamidi et al. (2007). 
   Figure 1 reveals that reduction of TSS was 81% using FeCl3 at OpCD of 1.5g/500mL. 
However, a study conducted by Jayabala (2005) and observed that FeCl3
 
was able to achieve 97% 
removal of TSS when wastewater was treated with 300mg/L. In this study, the reduction of 
turbidity was 95%, while for colour and COD was found 86 and 50%, respectively. The 
minimum removal of turbidity was 51% at a dosage of 0.50g/mL while the minimum reduction 
of leachate colour was 76% at a dosage of 0.50g/mL and 4.50g/mL. Hamidi et al. (2007) 
observed that removal of colour, turbidity and SS (at 200 mg/L of FeCl3) was 66%, 57% and 
72%, respectively.  Moreover, maximum reduction of Ca, K and Na using FeCl3 was 100%, 
while Mg was reduced by 80% as shown in Figure 2. The reduction of Cu, Zn, Cd, Ni and Pb was 
also observed and shown in Figure 3. Figure 3 reveals that efficiency of removal enhanced 
approached OpCD after which it rate was started to reduce gradually. Results showed that 
maximum reduction of Cu, Cd, Ni and Pb was 100%, while Zn was reduced by 93% (Figure 3).  
 
Table 2 Results of concentration dosage for treating leachate using FeCl3 
 
Concentration (dosage) of chemical (500mL) (treated leachate Parameter Untreated leachate 0.5 1 1.5 2 3 4 4.5 
Turbidity 106 52.3 7.58 5.29 6.83 7.82 20.6 21.5 
Colour 2190 520.0 456.0 297.0 355.0 420.0 401.0 520.0 
COD 510 345.0 272.0 255.0 268.0 282.0 310.0 380.0 
TSS 750 190.0 170.0 140.0 310.0 410.0 420.0 520.0 
Ca 214 103.0 12.0 0.0 10.0 14.0 28.0 35.0 
K 1444 469.0 367.0 0.0 256.0 356.0 567.0 798.0 
Na 1489 986.0 567.0 0.0 235.0 543.0 976.0 987.0 
Mg  226.58 165.0 89.0 45.0 56.0 76.0 98.0 156.0 
Cu 0.213 0.128 0.09 0.0 0.07 0.092 0.112 0.097 
Zn 0.595 0.265 0.30 0.04 0.20 0.267 0.223 0.437 
Cd 0.043 0.023 0.0013 0.0 0.012 0.027 0.029 0.034 
Ni 0.058 0.026 0.03 0.0 0.004 0.027 0.022 0.044 
Pb 0.235 0.126 0.11 0.0 0.12 0.127 0.122 0.147 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5
Re
m
ov
al 
(%
)
Ferric chloride dose (g/500mL)
Turbidity Colour COD TSS
Figure 1 Reduction of turbidity, colour, COD 
and TSS in leachate using FeCl3 dose. 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5
Re
m
ov
al 
(%
)
Ferric chloride dose (g/500mL)
Ca K Na Mg 
Figure 2 Reduction of Ca, K, Na and Mg in 
leachate using FeCl3 dose.  
  
1149 
3.1.2 Treatment with PAC at different concentration 
The efficiency in removing of inorganic compound, metal and heavy metal concentration in 
leachate with increased addition of PAC is shown in Figures 4, 5 and 6, respectively. The 
experimental results reveal that reduction of turbidity with increased addition of PAC at OpCD of 
2.0g/500mL was 89%, while, for colour, COD and TSS it was found 86, 41 and 79%, 
respectively, (Figure 4). Moreover, the reduction of Ca using PAC was 93%, while, for K, Na, 
and Mg it was 83, 82 and 86%, respectively (Figure 5). In contrast, the efficiency in removing Zn 
was 85%, while for Cu, Cd, Ni and Pb it was 77, 72, 78 and 53%, respectively (Figure 6). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.1.3 Treatment with FeSO4 at different concentration 
The efficiency of using FeSO4 at varying dosages in removing of inorganic compound as well as 
metal and heavy metal concentration in leachate is shown in Figures 7 and 8, respectively. Based 
on Figure 7, it was found the turbidity reduced by 93%, while for lcolour, COD and TSS it was 
found 87, 32 and 79%, respectively. In contrast, the efficiency in removing metal concentration 
of Ca, K, Na and Mg was found 92, 83, 82 and 83%, respectively and heavy metals of Cu, Zn, 
Cd, Ni and Pb was 83, 82, 74, 60 and 94%, correspondingly (Figure 8).  
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5
R
em
ov
al
 (%
)
Poly-aluminum chloride dose (g/500mL) 
Ca K Na Mg
Figure 5 Reduction of Ca, K, Na and Mg in 
leachate using PAC dose. 
Figure 6 Reduction of Cu, Zn, Cd, Ni and Pb in 
leachate using PAC dose. 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5
R
em
ov
al
 (%
)
Poly-aluminum chloride dose (g/500mL) 
Cu Zn Cd Ni Pb
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5
Re
m
ov
al 
(%
)
Ferric chloride dose (g/500mL)
Cu Zn Cd Ni Pb
Figure 3 Reduction of Cu, Zn, Cd, Ni and Pb in 
leachate using FeCl3 dose. 
Figure 4 Reduction of turbidity, colour, COD 
and TSS in leachate using PAC dose. 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5
Re
m
ov
al
 (%
)
Poly-aluminum chloride dose (g/500mL) 
Turbidity Colour COD TSS
  
1150 
Here, it of interested to note that COD was reduced 30-50% only using the all chemical 
coagulants stated earlier. As seen from results using FeCl3 PAC and FeSO4 the percentage 
reduction of all the pollutant parameters was increased up to an OpCD and beyond which 
decreased slowly. Similar findings are in agreed well with those obtained by Tatsi et al. (2003) 
and Rivas et al. (2004). This result is mainly due to the fact that the OpCD produced flocs a good 
structure and consistency, but in the lower dosage than the OpCD produced flocs small and the 
influence on settling velocity of sludge. In the higher dosage than OpCD, in addition to small size 
of flocs, restability of floc can be happened (Afshin et al. 2009).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.2 Regression Coefficient for Optimum Coagulant Dosage (Opcd) 
 
To depict the accuracy of mixing amount of coagulation dosages for removing of pollutant in 
leachate may be represented by the regression coefficient (R2) (Imran et al. 2011). In this study, 
the regression coefficient was analyzed to investigate the accuracy and efficiency of removing 
pollutant and hence evident in Figures 9-10. Figure 9 shows the effect of concentration of FeCl3
 on the removal of colour and cadmium. The curve increased up to the OpCD and then it was 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5
R
em
ov
al
 (%
)
Poly-aluminum chloride dose (g/500mL) 
Turbidity Potassium
Figure 10 Effect of concentration of PAC for 
removal of turbidity and K in leachate. 
Figure 8 Reduction of Ca, K, Na, Mg, Cu, Zn, 
Cd, Ni and Pd in leachate using FeSO4 dose. 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5
Re
m
ov
al
 (%
)
Ferrous sulphate dose (g/500mL)
Ca K Na Mg Cu
Zn Cd Ni Pb
Figure 7 Reduction of turbidity, colour, COD 
and TSS in leachate using FeSO4 dose. 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5
Re
m
ov
al
 (%
)
Ferrous sulphate dose (g/500mL)
Turbidity Colour COD TSS 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5
R
em
ov
al
  (
%
)
Ferric chloride dosage (g/500mL)
Colour Cadmium
Figure 9 Effect of concentration of FeCl3 for 
removal colour and Cd in leachate. 
  
1151 
decreased. Here, by separating the curve into two lines (Figures 9 a & b), regression analysis was 
performed to investigate the correlation of concentration of FeCl3 on the removal of pollutant. It 
was showed that they are linearly significant and R2 were
 
ranged between 0.943 to 0.812 and 
0.792 to 0.901 for colour and Cd, respectively. For example the regression coefficient for 
removing colour was R² = 0.943 approached the OpCD (Figure 9a), and R² = 0.812 after the 
OpCD (Figure 9b). However, the curve (Figure 9) was then split into two parts for analysis of Cd 
shown in Figures 9a & b. Moreover, the regression coefficient for removing of Cd was 0.792 
approached the OpCD (Figure 9a), and after the OpCD R2=0.901 (Figure 9b). Figure 10 shows 
the effect of PAC
 
on the removal of turbidity and K and it was separated into two lines 
(Figures10 a & b) as well as they are linearly significant and R2 were ranged between 0.957 to 
0.979 and 0.832 to 0.932, for turbidity and K, respectively. For example the regression 
coefficient for removing turbidity and K was R² = 0.957 and 0.832 approached the OpCD (Figure 
10a), and R² = 0.979 and 0.932 after the OpCD (Figure 10b), respectively.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9a Regression for removing colour and 
Cd using FeCl3 approached the OpCD. 
 
Colour = 10.18x + 70.44
R² = 0.943
Cadmium = 53.48x + 27.67
R² = 0.792
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0 0.5 1 1.5 2
R
em
ov
al
  (
%
)
Ferric chloride dosage (g/500mL)
Colour Cadmium
Figure 10a Regression for removing turbidity 
and K using PAC approached the OpCD. 
Turbidity = 19.92x + 48.63
R² = 0.957
Potassium = 11.39x + 57.83
R² = 0.832
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5
R
em
ov
al
 (%
)
Poly-aluminum chloride dose (g/500mL) 
Turbidity Potassium
Figure 9b Regression for colour and Cd using 
FeCl3 after the OpCD. 
Colour = -2.673x + 89.81
R² = 0.812
Cadmimum = -24.32x + 125.5
R² = 0.901
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5
Re
m
ov
al
  (
%
)
Ferric chloride dosage (g/500mL)
Colour Cadmium
Figure 10b Regression for removing turbidity 
and K using PAC after the OpCD. 
Turbidity = -33.63x + 156.3
R² = 0.979
Potassium = -16.57x + 118.7
R² = 0.932
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5
Re
m
ov
al
 (%
)
Poly-aluminum chloride dose (g/500mL) 
Turbidity Potassium
  
1152 
3.3 Effect of pH on the OpCD of Coagulation  
 
The range of pH was examined from 4 to 9 using FeCl3, PAC and FeSO4 is shown in Figures 11-
16, while the original pH value of raw leachate was 7.31. From Figures 11-16, efficiency of 
coagulation-flocculation was obtained in the pH of 6.5 to 7.5 for all the coagulant (approximately 
near the original pH) and the optimum pH was 7.0. However, in order to evaluate the effect of pH 
on the reduction of inorganic compound, metal and heavy metal, experiments were conducted by 
different chemical coagulants at varying pH of 4 to 9 and hence discussed in followings. 
 
Table 3 Results of leachate treatment at varying pH with optimum concentration using FeCl3 
 
Treated of leachate with various pH at optimum concentration of FeCl3 Parameters Untreated leachate  pH 4 pH 5 pH 6 pH 7 pH 8 pH 9 
Turbidity 106 28.72 21.54 11.42 6.36 8.48 13.6 
Colour 2190 540.0 358.40 306.60 262.80 306.0 350.40 
COD 510 301.0 285.0 264.0 255.0 268.0 295.0 
TSS 750 200.0 180.0 165.0 157.50 172.50 187.50 
Ca 214.10 34.0 28.0 12.0 9.0 12.0 14.0 
K 1444.20 364.0 256.0 245.0 201.0 236.0 268.0 
Na 1488.70 317.0 259.0 227.0 201.0 256.0 236.0 
Mg 226.58 83.0 48.0 44.0 32.0 90.0 96.0 
Cu 0.213 0.40 0.40 0.40 0.30 0.50 0.50 
Zn 0.595 0.160 0.115 0.105 0.100 0.120 0.127 
Cd 0.040 0.021 0.012 0.011 0.0 0.002 0.015 
Ni 0.060 0.031 0.022 0.011 0.0 0.012 0.015 
Pb 0.24 0.120 0.100 0.021 0.0 0.022 0.017 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.3.1 Effect of pH on coagulation with FeCl3 
The effect of pH on the reduction of inorganic compound as well as metal and heavy metal, 
maintaining the concentration of FeCl3 at OpCD of 1.5g/mL is presented in Table 3 and also in 
Figure 11 and Figure 12, respectively. The Figure 11 reveals that maximum removal of pollutant 
Figure 11 Reduction of turbidity, colour, COD 
and TSS at varying pH using FeCl3 at OpCD. 
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
R
em
ov
al
 (%
)
pH
Turbidity Colour COD TSS 
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
R
em
ov
al
 (%
)
pH
Ca K Mg Na Cu
Zn Cd Ni Pb
Figure 12 Reduction of metals concentation at 
varying pH using FeCl3 at OpCD. 
  
1153 
using FeCl3
 
at OpCD of 1.5g/500mL at pH 7, while, minimum removal was found for most of the 
pollutants at pH 4. At pH 7, FeCl3
 
was effective in removing turbidity, colour, COD and TSS by 
94, 88, 50 and 79%, respectively, while, minimum reduction of 73% for turbidity, 75% for 
colour, 41% for COD and 73% for TSS at pH 4. In contrast, Figure 12 reveals that the maximum 
reduction of Ca, K, Na and Mg was found 96, 86, 86 and 86% as well as Cd, Ni and Pb was 
100% except for Cu and Zn, it was 81 and 83%, respectively. Moreover, the minimum reduction 
was found 81, 73, 51, 47, 49% for Cu, Zn, Cd, Ni and Pb at pH 4. According to Jayabala (2005) 
the treatment of leachate to remove As and Cd with FeCl3 at optimum concentration (40mg/L) 
achieved 99.8% reduction of As and 94% of Cd at pH 6. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.3.2 Effect of pH on coagulation with PAC and FeSO4 
 
The reduction of inorganic compounds as well as metal and heavy metal concentration in 
leachate using PAC at OpCD of 2.0/500mL is shown in Figures 13 and 14, respectively. Here, it 
is interesting to note that the removal efficiency was increased in relation to the increasing of pH 
up to the optimum pH at 7, and then it was decreased. Based on Figure 13, it can be concluded  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
R
em
ov
al
 (%
)
pH
Turbidity Colour COD TSS
Ca K Na Mg
Cu Zn Cd Ni
Pb
Figure 15 Reduction of pollutant in leachate at 
varying pH using FeSO4 at OpCD. 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
R
em
ov
al
 (%
)
pH
Turbidity Colour TSS COD 
Figure 13 Rreduction of turbidity, colour, COD 
and TSS at varying pH using PAC at OpCD. 
Figure 14 Reduction of metals concentration at 
varying pH using PAC at OpCD. 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
R
em
ov
al
 (%
)
pH
Ca K Na Mg Cu
Zn Cd Ni Pb
  
1154 
 
that maximum removal efficiency of turbidity with of 91%, while, the minimum was found for 
COD with 45%. Based on Figure 14, it can be seen that maximum reduction of metal occurred 
for Ca of 94%, while minimum was found for Na of 84%. Moreover, the reduction for PAC at pH 
7 for Cu, Zn, Cd, Ni and Pb was 85, 82, 93, 86 and 96%, respectively. The minimum reduction of 
heavy metals occurred at pH 4 and it was 75% for Cu, 55% for Zn, 72% for Cd, 53% for Ni and 
53% for Pb. In addition, the maximum reduction was occurred using FeSO4 at optimum pH 7 for 
colour was 95% while minimum was found for COD of 37% (Figure 15). However, for Ca, K, 
Na and Mg was reduced by 95, 88, 88 and 95%, correspondingly, as well as 82, 82, 93, 84 and 
95% was found for Cu, Zn, Cd, Ni and Pb, respectively (Figure 15). 
 
3.4 Regression Coefficient for Optimum pH  
 
Figures 11 and 12 shows the effect of pH ranging from 4-9 on the reduction of pollutant using 
FeCl3
 
at OpCD. However, the good conformity correlations of inorganic compound and metals 
concentration in leachate against of various pH were investigated by evaluating the regression 
coefficient (R2). Here, it was noticed that the regression coefficient (R2) at varying pH was 
strongly linear and it was varied in case of approached and after optimum dosage of pH. The 
correlations of Cd and Pb were split into two parts. Based on the experimental results, it can be 
concluded that the regression coefficient for removing of Cd and Pb approached the optimum pH 
was 0.929 and 0.931, whereas, after optimum it was 0.808 and 0.528, respectively.  
Moreover, the good conformity correlations of inorganic compound and metals concentration 
in leachate using FeSO4 at OpCD of 1.5g/500mL against of various pH were also investigated by 
evaluating the regression coefficient (R2) as shown in Figure 15. Moreover, the correlations of Zn 
and Pb were split into two parts is evident in Figure (16a) and Figure (16b). Result showed that 
the regression coefficient for removing of Zn and Pb approached the optimum pH was 0.855 and 
0.611 (Figure 16a), whereas, after optimum it was 0.881 and 0.904, respectively (Figure 16b). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Zinc= -1.848x + 94.06
R² = 0.881
Lead = -5.744x + 134.4
R² = 0.904
70
75
80
85
90
95
100
3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
R
em
ov
al
 (%
)
pH
Zn Pb
Figure 16b Regression for pH 7-9 removing Zn 
and Pb using FeSO4 after the OpCD. 
Zinc= 4.151x + 53.51
R² = 0.855
Lead = 3.063x + 72.51
R² = 0.611
50
60
70
80
90
100
3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
R
em
ov
al
 (%
)
pH
Zn Pb
Figure 16a Regression for pH 4-7 removing Zn 
and Pb using FeSO4 approached the OpCD. 
  
1155 
 
Table 4 Comparative reduction of pollutant using chemical coagulant at optimum condition 
 
Removal efficiency (%) 
C
oa
gu
la
nt
 
O
pt
im
um
 
C
on
di
tio
n 
Tu
rb
id
ity
 
C
ol
or
 
C
O
D
 
TS
S 
C
al
ci
um
 
Po
ta
ss
iu
m
 
So
di
um
 
M
an
ga
ne
se
 
C
op
pe
r 
Zi
nc
 
C
ad
m
iu
m
 
N
ic
ke
l 
Le
ad
 
1.5g/500mL 95 86 50 81 100 100 100 80 100 93 100 100 100 FeCl3 
pH 7 94 88 50 79 96 86 86 86 81 83 100 100 100 
2.0g/500mL 89 86 41 79 93 83 82 86 77 85 72 78 53 PAC pH 7 91 88 45 80 94 84 84 91 85 82 93 86 96 
1.5g/500mL 93 87 32 79 92 83 82 83 83 82 74 60 96 FeSO4 
pH 7 92 95 37 79 95 88 88 95 82 82 93 84 95 
 
 
4. Optimum Results of Leachate Treatment 
 
The optimum results were achieved 
using different coagulants of FeCl3, 
PAC and FeSO4 at OpCD of 1.5, 2.0 
and 1.5g/500mL, respectively, at 
optimum pH 7 and mixing speed 
110rpm for the removal of pollutants 
in leachate are evident in Table 4 and 
also in Figure 17. At OpCD with 
varying pH, three chemical 
coagulants show varying percentage 
reduction in concentration of 
parameters. FeCl3 was able to 
achieve complete removal of Ca, K, 
Na, Cu, Cd, Ni and Pb at OpCD, 
while at optimum pH it was able to 
achieve complete removal of Cd, Ni 
and Pb. Results showed that 
optimum reduction of turbidity was 
found 95, 89 and 93%; 93, 85 and 
82% for the reduction of Zn, for FeCl3, PAC and FeSO4 at OpCD, respectively. Here, it can be 
concluded that the removal efficiency for most of the pollutants in leachate, FeCl3 was more 
effective than the other coagulants at optimum pH 7.Results indicate that the leachate treatment 
with FeCl3 at OpCD of 1.5g/500ml at pH 7 with mixing speed 110 rpm was able to reduce the 
Cd, Ni and Pb concentration (Figure 12) by 100%, to 0 mg/L which is below the Environmental 
Quality requirements (Sewage and Industrial Effluent) as well as the maximum discharging 
standard for landfill leachate from selected countries (USA, Germany, Hong Kong and Malaysia) 
(Figure 18a). Moreover, treatment with FeCl3 at OpCD of 1.5g/500ml at pH 7 with mixing speed 
110 rpm was only able to reduce COD by 50%, to 255mg/L, which is still above the 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
FeCl3 PAC FeSO4
R
em
ov
al
 (%
)
Chemical coagulants
Turbidity Color COD TSS Ca K Na Mg Cu Zn Cd Ni Pb
Figure 17 Optimum results of leachate treatment with 
various coagulants at optimum condition. 
  
1156 
Environmental Quality requirements (Sewage and Industrial Effluent), Bangladesh standards for 
discharging treated leachate into Inland surface water as well as the maximum discharging 
standard for landfill leachate from selected countries (USA, Germany, France, Hong Kong, South 
Korea and Malaysia) (Figure 18b).In contrast, PAC at 2.0g/500ml, pH7 and mixing speed 110 
rpm has an ability to remove the Zn (Figure 19a) by 82%, to 0.11 mg/L, Ni (Figure 19b) by 86, to 
0.008 mg/L which is below the Environmental Quality requirements as well as maximum 
discharging standard for leachate from selected countries (USA, Germany, Hong Kong and 
Malaysia). The finding of this study using FeCl3 and PAC for the removal of heavy metals is 
quite similar to the finding observed by Jayabala (2005) and stated that FeCl3 at 40 mg/L and pH 
6 was able to reduce As and Cd to 0.0015 mg/L which is below the EQA requirements, 
moreover, using PAC at 4 mg/L was able to reduce As to 0.409 mg/L at pH 8, which was still 
above the EQA requirements. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.1
C
on
ce
nt
ra
tio
n 
(m
g/
L
)
Cd, Ni and Pb Parameter
Figure 18a Compared the efficiency of FeCl3 
removal of Cd, Ni and Pb with standard tools. 
Figure 18b Compared the efficiency of FeCl3 
removal of COD with standard tool. 
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
C
on
ce
nt
ra
tio
n 
(m
g/
L
)
COD Parameter
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
C
on
ce
nt
ra
tio
n 
(m
g/
L
)
Ni Parameter
Figure 19b Compared the efficiency of PAC on 
removal of Ni with standard tools. 
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
C
on
ce
nt
ra
tio
n 
(m
g/
L
)
Zn parameter
Figure 19a Compared the efficiency of PAC on 
removal of Zn with standard tools. 
  
1157 
4. Conclusions 
 
Based on observed result it can be concluded that maximum reduction using FeCl3 at OpCD of 
1.5g/500mL for Ca, K, Na, Cu, Cd, Ni and Pb was found 100%, while for Mg and Zn it was 80 
and 93%, correspondingly. In contrast, the reduction using PAC at OpCD of 2.0g/500mL for Ca, 
K, Na, Mg, Zn, Cu, Cd, Ni and Pb was found 93, 83, 82, 86, 85, 77, 72, 78 and 53%, 
respectively. Moreover, using the FeSO4 at OpCD of 1.5g/500mL, the efficiency for removing of 
turbidity was 93%, while for colour, COD and TSS it was 87, 32 and 79%, respectively, as well 
as the metal concentrations of Ca, K, Na and Mg was 92, 83, 82 and 83% and heavy metal of Cu, 
Zn, Cd, Ni and Pb was 83, 82, 74, 60 and 94%, correspondingly. Finally, it can be concluded that 
FeCl3 was found to be effective as coagulant in leachate treatment, prior to biological treatment. 
FeCl3
 
was found to be the preferred chemical compared to PAC and FeSO4 because this chemical 
was able to give more reduction than PAC and FeSO4. 
 
References 
 
Afshin, et al. (2009). Composting Plant Leachate Treatment by Coagulation-Flocculation 
Process, American-Eurasian J. Agric.  and Env. Sci., 5 (5): 638-643. 
Amokarane, A., Comel, C. and Veron, J. (1997). Landfill Leachate Pretreatment by Coagulation- 
Flocculation, J. of water research, 31 (11): 2775-2782. 
APHA (1998). Standard Methods for Examination of Water and Wastewater, 19th edition, 
Prepared and published jointly by American Public Health Association (APHA), American 
Water Works Association (AWWA) and Water Environment Federation Publication 
(WEFP), Washington DC. 
Aziz, H. A., Alias, S., Adlan, M. N., Faridah Asaari, A. H., and Zahari, M. S. (2007). Colour 
removal from leachate by coagulation-flocculation, Bioresource Technology, 98:218-220. 
Beauchesnea, I., N., Meunierb, P., Droguia, R. Hauslerb, G. Merciera and J.Blaisa, (2005). 
Electrolytic Recovery of Lead in Used Lime Leachate from Municipal Waste Incinerator, 
Journal of Hazardous Materials B, 120: 201-211. 
Chian, E., (1977). Stability of Organic Matter in Landfill Leachates. Water research, 11:225-232. 
Ebeling, J.M., Sibrell, P.L., Orden, S.R., Summerfelt, S.T., (2003). Evaluation of Chemical 
Coagulation-Flocculation Aids for Removal of Suspended Solids and Phosphorus from 
Intensive Recalculating Aquaculture Effluent Discharge. Aquacul. Eng., 29 (1-2): 23-42. 
Hamidi Abdul Aziz, Salina Alias, Mohd. Nordin Adlan, Faridah, A.H. Asaari, Mohd. Shahrir 
Zahari, (2007). Colour Removal from Landfill Leachate by Coagulation and Flocculation 
Processes, J. of Bioresource Technology 98: 218-220. 
Imran, R., Rafizul, I.M. and Alamgir, M. (2011). Pollutants Removal from Leachate In Sanitary 
Landfill Lysimeter using Chemical Coagulations, 2nd International Conference on Solid 
Waste Management in Developing Countries, February 13-15, 2011, WasteSafe 2011, Dept. 
of CE, KUET, Khulna, Bangladesh, pp.201-203. 
Jayabala, M., M. (2005). Removal of Arsenic from Municipal Landfill Leachate, Dissertation M. 
Tech. (Environmental Mgmt.) Institute of Biological Sciences, University of Malaya. 145 pp. 
Kargi, F., Pamukoglu, M. (2003). Simultaneous Adsorption and Biological  Treatment of Pre-
Treated Landfill Leachate by Fed-Batch Operation, Process Biochem. 38 (10) :1413–1420. 
Li, X.Z., Zhao, Q.L. and Hao, X.D., (1999). Ammonium Removal from Landfill Leachate by 
Chemical Precipitation, Waste Manage. 19:409-415. 
  
1158 
Ntampou, X., Zouboulis, A.I. and Samaras, P., (2006). Appropriate Combination of Physico-
Chemical Methods (Coagulation/Flocculation and Ozonation) for the Efficient Treatment of 
Landfill Leachates, Chemosphere, 62 (5):722-730. 
Rafizul, I. M., M. Alamgir, E. Kraft, and G. Haedrich (2009). Characterization of Leachate 
Generated from MSW in Sanitary Landfill Lysimeter, Proc. of Sardinia 2009, Twelfth 
International Waste Management and Landfill Symposium, 5 -9 Oct., Cagliari, Italy. 
Rivas et al. (2004). Stabilized Leachates: Sequential Coagulation-Flocculation + Chemical 
Oxidation Process, Journal of Hazardous materials B, 116:95-102. 
Tatsi, A. A., Zouboulis, A. I., Matis,  K. A. and Samaras, P. (2003). Coagulation Flocculation 
Pretreantent of Sanitary Landfill Leachates, Chemosphere, 53:737-744. 
Wichitsathian, B., Sindhuja, S., Visvanathan, C. and Ahn, K., (2004). Landfill Leachate 
Treatment by Yeast and Bacteria Based Membrane Bioreactors, J. Environ. Sci. Health Part 
A-Toxic/Hazard. Substances Environ. Eng. A39 (9): 2391–2404.105.   
 
 
1159 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
VARIABILITY OF PARAMETERS INVOLVED IN LEACHATE POLLUTION INDEX 
AND DETERMINATION OF LPI FROM SOLID WASTE LANDFILL IN 
BANGLADESH 
 
 
Islam M. Rafizul1, Nazmul Huda Chowdhury1, Mahmud M. Minhaz2 and Muhammed Alamgir3 
 
 
ABSTRACT: Solid waste landfill sites are potentially sources of human and environmental 
hazards. Leachate produces from solid waste landfill is heterogeneous and exhibits huge temporal 
and seasonal variations. Moreover, leachate pollution index (LPI) provides an overall pollution 
potential of a solid waste landfill site. The parameters are required to calculate LPI from a landfill 
sites are discussed in terms of their variation over time, and their significance is highlighted in the 
context of LPI. To these attempts, LPI of two open landfill at Chittagong and Rajshahi city, two 
sanitary landfill of Rajbandh at Khulna and Matuail at Dhaka, Bangladesh, have been described. 
It was noticed based on experimental results that Dhaka landfill was the highest LPI, while, 
Rajshahi landfill having the lowest LPI in compare to the other studied landfill. Finally, it can be 
conducted that LPI can be used as a tool to assess the leachate pollution from landfill particularly 
at places where there is a high risk of leachate migration and pollution of ground water. 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Risks  to  the  various  elements   of  the  environment  from open solid waste landfills exist 
in many parts of the world, particularly  in  the under-developed  and  developing  countries. 
Most of the solid waste landfills in the under developed and developing nations does not exist 
the base and cap liners, lechate and gas collection system, as well as the monitoring devices 
(Rafizul et al. 2011). No post-closure monitoring of these uncontrolled landfills is done and 
therefore there is no check on the envi r onmenta l  and human health risks  that they pose.  
The subsurface water, surface water, soil, surrounding vegetation and ambient air thus get 
tainted due to the landfill leachate and gas emissions (Tchobanoglous et al. 1993; Masters 
1998). There  are  hundreds and  thousands  of closed  and  active uncontrolled landfills  in  
many  nations  around   the  world. Most  of the  developing  and  under-developed nations  
now realize the  effect  of potential  damage  to  the  environment from these  landfills. 
Although legal stipulation n exits in many countries, there are usually financial constraints, and a 
lack of technical resourced and physical infrastructure to apply it. It has been estimated that 
unlined sanitary landfills in a comparatively wet climate will produce leachate containing 
                                                        
1Department of Civil engineering, KUET, Bangladesh, imrafizul@yahoo.com 
,shuvo_32@yahoo.com, and alamgir63dr@yahoo.com. 
 2Research Associate, SHAKKHOR Environment & Education Development Society (SEEDS), 
Bangladesh (E-Mail: tomnhz@gmail.com) 
  
 
 
1160 
hazardous  chemicals  such  as  lead  at concentrations  above  the  drinking  water  standards  
for  several thousand years (Believe and Backing, 1989). It is not surprising that the landfills 
made by the Romans about  2000  years  ago  are  still  producing   leachate  (Freeze  and  
Cherry, 1979).  Contamination of groundwater by leachate makes the connected aquifer 
unreliable for domestic water supply and other uses (Jones Lee and Lee, 1993). Containing 
hundreds of different chemicals, the characteristics of solid waste landfill leachate vary 
significantly within an individual landfill over space and time. Also, leachate characteristics 
vary considerably from one landfill to another (Kumar and Alappat, 2003).Therefore the 
remedial and precautionary measures cannot be undertaken at all the existing closed and the 
active landfill sites in one go because of the financial constraints.  The remedial and 
precautionary measures need to be taken up in a phased manner. Kumar and Alappat (2003) 
developed a technique to evaluate the leachate contamination potential of different landfills 
on a comparative scale using an index known as Leachate Pollution Index (LPI).  LPI  has  
many  applications  including  ranking  of  landfill  sites,  resource  allocation  for  landfill 
remediation, enforcement of standards, scientific research and public information.In this 
paper, the concept of LPI is described in brief and stepwise procedure to calculate the LPI 
of a landfill is explained by means of actual data from a municipal landfill site in Dhaka, 
Chittagong, Khulna, Rajshahi city.Moreover, the leachate parameter involved in LPI in terms of 
its significant and variability were cited by the auther. Based on the results it has been concluded 
that, LPI can be successfully used to reprent the composite influence of various leachate pollutant 
variables. 
 
2. Materials and Methods 
 
In this study, to calculate the individual and overall pollutant rating of selected solid waste 
landfill in Bangladesh based on LPI, the detailed procedure postulated by Kumar and Alappat 
(2003) was followed and hence discussed in followings. 
 
2.1 Concept of leachate pollution index 
 
In an effort to develop a system for comparing the leachate pollution potential of various landfill 
sites in a given geographical area, 80 panelists consists of academicians in environmental science 
and engineering; environmental regulatory authority officials and scientists; consulting engineers; 
and members of International Solid Waste Association (ISWA) conducting the necessary survey 
around the world. The survey was conducted using multiple questionnaires to formulate LPI 
based on Rand Corporation’s Delphi Technique (Dalkey 1968).                                
 
2.2 Pollutant variables selection 
 
From literature, fifty (50) commonly reported leachate parameters were selected for their possible 
inclusion in the LPI. In questionnaire 1, the panelists were introduced to the possibility of 
preparing a tool in the form of LPI. Moreover, the panelists were also asked to consider fifty (50) 
leachate parameters for their possible inclusion in the proposed LPI. Panelists were also 
requested to add any variables to the list of fifty (50) parameters, which, they feel shall also be 
included in the LPI. They were also asked to designate all the parameters as follows:                                   
(i) do not include (ii) or undecided and (ii) or include. 
 
 
1161 
   Panelists were also requested to rate each parameter marked ‘include’ according to the 
significance of its contribution to overall leachate pollution. The rating was to be done on a scale 
of ‘1’ to ‘5’. The value ‘1’ and ‘5’ were to be used for the parameter that has lowest and highest 
relative significance to the leachate contamination, respectively. The eighteen (18) selected 
pollutants and the significance obtained for them are given in Table 1.  
 
Table1 Significance and weights of the pollutant parameters (after Kumar and Alappat 2003) 
 
Sl. No. Pollutant          Significance      Pollutant weight 
1 Total Chromium 4.057 0.064 
2 Lead 4.019 0.063 
3 COD 3.963 0.062 
4 Mercury 3.923 0.062 
5 BOD5 3.902 0.061 
6 Arsenic 3.885 0.061 
7 Cyanide 3.694 0.058 
8 Phenol Compound 3.627 0.057 
9 Zinc 3.585 0.056 
10 pH 3.509 0.055 
11 Total Kjeldahl Nitrogen 3.367 0.053 
12 Nickel 3.321 0.052 
13 Total Coliform Bacteria 3.289 0.052 
14 Ammonia Nitrogen 3.250 0.051 
15 Total Dissolved Solids 3.196 0.050 
16 Copper 3.170 0.050 
17 Chlorides 3.078 0.049 
18 Total Iron 2.830 0.045 
 Total 63.165 1.000 
 
 
2.3 Development of pollutant variable rating curves 
 
In the third questionnaire, a selected group of panelists was requested to develop rating curves for 
all the eighteen (18) selected variables as shown in Figures 1 to 3. This was done by providing 
graph sheets to the panelists. On the graph sheets, levels of leachate pollution (sub index score) 
from ‘0’ to ‘100’ were indicated on the ordinate of each graph, while, various level of 
concentrations of particular variable, up to the maximum limits reported in literature, were 
marked along the abscissa. The panelists were requested to draw a curve on each graph, which 
represented leachate pollution produced by the various concentrations of each lechate 
pollutant.The panelists were requested to start the curves for each pollutant variable with a 
minimum value of ‘5’ of leachate pollution even if there is no contamination from the pollutant to 
the overall leachate pollution. This was done to ensure that multiplicative aggregation function 
can be used at the later stage, if required, and the minimum value of ‘5’ units of leachate 
pollution will ensure that the LPI value does not result in zero even if some of the pollutants do 
not show any pollution. Therefore, the theoretical range of LPI is from ‘0’ to ‘100’.The responses 
received on graph sheets have been used to produce a set of ‘average curves’, one for each 
 
 
1162 
pollutant variable. As all the curves are obtained from the survey, they are implicit non-linear 
functions for which no mathematical equations can be given. In each figure, the bold line shows 
the arithmetic mean of all the panelists’ curves, while, the x axis error bars indicate the 90% 
confidence limit. Approximately 75% of the panelists’ curves fall within this area. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1 LPI organic (LPIor) sub-index average curves with 90% confidence limit for (a) COD; 
(b) BOD5; (c) phenolic compounds and (d) total coliform bacteria  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2 LPI organic (LPIin) sub-index average curves with 90% confidence limit for (a) pH; (b) 
total kjeldhal nitrogen; (c) ammonia nitrogen; (d) total dissolved solid and (e) chlorides  
 
 
 
1163 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3 LPI organic (LPIhm) sub-index average curves with 90% confidence limit for (a) 
chromium; (b) lead; (c) mercury; (d) arsenic; (e) cyanide;(f) zinc; (g) nickel (h) copper; and (i) 
total iron (all concentration in mgL-1) (after Kumar and Alappat, 2003). 
 
2.4 Variable Aggregation 
 
The weighted sum linear aggregation function was used to sum up the behavior of all the 
leachate pollutant variables. The various possible aggregation functions were evaluated by 
Kumar and Alappat (2003) to select the best possible aggregation function. The analysis of 
the six short-listed aggregation function was performed to arrive at the best possible 
aggregation function. However, Panelists suggested that if the concentrations of the eighteen (18) 
selected variables are known, the following equation (1) is used. Otherwise, equation (2) is used. 
  
 
i
n
1i
ipwLPI 

  (1) 
 
LPI = the weighted additive leachate pollution index 
wi = the weight for the Ith pollutant variable 
pi = the sub-index value of the I th leachate pollutant variable, number of leachate pollutant 
parameters 
 
 
1164 
n =18 and ∑ wi =1. 
  (2) 
 
 
Pollutant parameter for which data is available in this study, m < 18 and ∑ wi <1  
 
 
3. Overview of Selected Solid Waste Landfill in Bangladesh 
 
3.1. Matuail Landfill (Dhaka) 
 
The Matuail landfill site is located on the eastern part of Dhaka city. Dhaka had a population of 
over 15 million in 2010, making it the largest city. It is the 9th largest city in the world and also 
28th among the most densely populated cities in the world. It produces average 2500 MT 
municipal solid waste (MSW). Dhaka City Corporation has constructed the first ever sanitary 
landfill in Bangladesh with the technical assistance of Japan International Corporation Agency 
(JICA). The total area of landfill is about 40 hectare; out of which 20 hectare a 15 years old open 
dump is situated. The landfill has base liner and leachate collection and treatment system. 
 
3.2 Chittagong Landfill  
 
Chittagong is a city in southeastern Bangladesh and the capital of an eponymous district and 
division. Built on the banks of the Karnaphuli River, the city is home to Bangladesh's busiest 
seaport and has a population of over 4.5 million, making it the second largest city in the country. 
The city produces average daily 200MT waste. The dumping station of Chittagong city is 
Garbage treatment Plant, Ananda Bazar, Halishahar. 
 
3.3 RajbandhLandfill (Khulna)  
 
Khulna is the third largest city in Bangladesh with an estimated population of 1,435,422 which 
produces 450 Metric Tons (average) MSW per day. The Old Rajbandh having an area of 20 acres 
is located about 8km far ‘Royal-Castle Salam Square’ of Khulna city and situated along the 
North-side of Khulna-Satkhira highway. The New Rajbandh the second ultimate disposal site 
(UDS) site of MSW of KCC, having an area of 5 acres is just 700m west from the Old Rajbandh. 
 
3.4 Rajshahi Landfill 
 
Rajshahi is located in the north-west of the country and has an estimated population of around 
475,000 people. Its total area is 96.69 km2 (37.33 sq mi) and produce 350MT MSW per day.  
Rajshahi city hut is used to dump MSW in Rajshahi which is 3Km west side from Aam Chattor. 
It is an open dumping station and there is no base liner in the site. 
 
4. Result and discussions 
 
In this study, to evaluate the contaminate potential of selected solid waste landfill in Bangladesh, 
the significance and variation of leachate parameters in LPI, individual and overall LPI as well as 
the variability of leachate involved in LPI has been analyzed and hence discussed in followings. 



i
i
n
i
i
w
pw
LPI 1
 
 
1165 
 
4.1 Significance and Variation of parameters of leachates in LPI in Solid Waste Landfill 
 
pH: A study conducted by Christensen et al. (2001) observed that leachate is generally found to 
have pH between 4.5 and 9, moreover, pH of young leachate is less than 6.5, while, old landfill 
leachate has pH higher than 7.5 (Abbas et al. 2009). Bohdziewicz et al. (2008) reported that 
initial low pH is due to high concentration of volatile fatty acids (VFAs). However, in this study, 
pH was ranging 6-9, 6-8.5, 6-8.5 and 6-8.5 for the solid waste landfill of Dhaka, Chittagong, 
Rajshahi and Khulna, respectively. 
 
TDS: TDS compromise mainly of inorganic salts and dissolved organics. According to Koshy 
(2002) TDS is one of the parameters taken into consideration for licensing discharge of landfill 
leachate in many countries such as Al-Yaqout (2003) showed that the amount of TDS reflects the 
extent of mineralization and a higher TDS concentration can change the physical and chemical 
characteristics of water. In this study, TDS was ranging 800-5600, 800-3000, 600-2500 and 500-
2500 for the solid waste landfill of Dhaka, Chittagong, Rajshahi and Khulna, respectively. 
 
BOD5 and COD: Foo (2009) showed that young landfill leachate is characterized by high BOD5 
(4000~13000 mg/L) and COD (30000~60000 mg/L). It has been demonstrated (Tatsi et al. 2003) 
that young leachate may have BOD5 as high as 81000 mg/L. A much higher value of COD 
(70900 mg/L) is reported in leachate obtained from the Thessalonki Greater Area (Greece) by 
Tasti and Zouboulis. It has been demonstrated (Li 2002) that the increase in age of landfill is 
decrease the BOD5 and COD. However, in this study, BOD5 was 900-5000, 1000-6000, 1800-
4000, 2000-4000, and range of COD was 2000-10000, 2200-8000, 1500-9000, 1500-9500 for the 
solid waste landfill of Dhaka, Chittagong, Rajshahi and Khulna, respectively. 
 
Total Nitrogen: According to Kulikowska et al. (2008) ammonium represents the major 
proportion of total nitrogen. In comparison to soluble organics, the release of soluble nitrogen 
from waste into leachate continues over longer period. As a result the concentration of ammonia 
nitrogen increases with the increase in age of the landfill which is due to hydrolysis and 
fermentation of nitrogenous fractions of biodegradable refuses substances (Abbas et al. 2009). 
Ammonia concentration differs highly in leachate from different landfill from tens to hundreds of 
mg NNH4/L to couple of thousands (2000 mg NNH4/L) to several thousands (> 10000 mg NNH4/L) 
(Statom et al. 2004, Marttinen et al. 2003). Ammonia nitrogen is ranked as a major toxicant to 
living organism, as established by various test toxicity analysis using bioassays and various test 
organisms (Kurniwan et al. 2006). Higher concentration of ammonia are also known to enhance 
algal growth, promote eutrophication due to decreased dissolved oxygen (Kurniwan et al. 2006). 
Due to its toxicity it can also disrupt biological leachate treatment operations (Deng et al. 2007). 
However, in this study, Nitrogen was ranging 300-1200, 300-800,200-600,280-750 for the solid 
waste landfill of Dhaka, Chittagong, Rajshahi and Khulna, respectively. 
 
Phenol: Christensen et al. (2001) reports the concentration of phenolic compounds in a landfill 
between 1–2100 µg/L. Phenolic compounds are readily degradable under aerobic conditions 
while their degradation under anaerobic conditions is uncertain. However, in this study, Phenol 
 
 
1166 
was ranging 3-8, 3-7, 2.5-5 and 2.5-6 for the solid waste landfill of Dhaka, Chittagong, Rajshahi 
and Khulna, respectively. 
 
Chlorides: According to Deng and Englehardt (2007) the chlorides may range between 200-3000 
mg/L. for a 1-2 year old landfill the concentration decreases for a landfill greater than 5-10 years 
old. Bowman et al. (2002) found chlorides as high as 8000 mg/L in Newington landfill leachate 
in Sydney. However, in this study, chlorides was ranging 1000-3500, 1500-3000, 1000-2500, and 
100-3000 for the solid waste landfill of Dhaka, Chittagong, Rajshahi and Khulna, respectively. 
 
Heavy Metal: Concentration of heavy metal in landfill leachate is generally higher at earlier stage 
because of higher metal solubility as a result of low pH caused by production of organic acids 
(Klimiuk et al. 2008). A lower concentration of Cd (0.006 mg/L), Ni (0.13 mg/L), Zn (0.61 
mg/L),Cu (0.07 mg/L), Pb (0.07 mg/L), and Cr (0.08 mg/L) were found in Danish landfills by 
Christensen et al. (2001) and kjeldsen and cristophersen (2001). According to Jones et al. (2006) 
the solubility and mobility of metals may increase in presence of natural and synthetic 
complexing ligands such as EDTA and humic substances. According to Baun and Christensen et 
al. (2004) less than 30%, typically less than 10% of the total metal concentration is present in free 
metal ion forms and the rest is present in colloidal or organic complexes. Jensen and cristensen 
(1999) found that 10-60% of Ni, 30-100% Cu and 0-95% Zn were constituted in colloidal 
function. The solubility in metals can also increase because of the reducing condition of leachate. 
In this study, Cr 15-20, 17-24, 12-17 and 12-16, Lead 0.4-0.5 for all four landfills, Mercury 0.3-
0.5, 0.3-0.45, 0.25-0.35 and 0.25-0.32, Arsenic 0.01-0.03 for all four landfills, Cynide 1-1.5, 1-
1.45, 0.5-1.2, and 0.5-1.2, Zinc 13-20, 14-20, 13-17, and 13-16, Nickel 0.05-1, 03-0.075, 0.03-
0.06, and 0.03-.05, Copper 3-6.5, 2.5-6, 2-4.5,  and 2.5-4.5, total Iron 4.5-6.5, 3.5-6, 3.5-5 and 
3.5-5.5 for solid waste landfill of Chittagong, Dhaka, Khulna and Rajshahi, respectively. 
 
4.2. Evaluation of LPI of Solid Waste Landfill 
 
Table 2 and 3 illustrates the calculation of LPI for a particular period of leachate sampling for 
Dhaka, Chittagong, Khulna and Rajshahi landfill respectively. Based on Table 2, it can be seen 
that the derived LPI for the Dhaka landfill was the highest, while, for Rajshahi landfill the lowest 
(Figure 4). The higher LPI (40.14) for the Dhaka landfill further indicates that the MSW has not 
yet stabilized. This is also evident from the high BOD5 and COD values. The standards for the 
disposal of treated leachate to inland surface water as per the Management and Handling Rules 
(The Gazette of India, 2000) should not exceed 2.0, 0.1, 250, 0.01, 30, 0.20, 0.20, 1.0, 5.0, 5.5-
9.0, 100,  3.0, 50.0, 2100, 3.0 and1000 for Cr, Pb, COD, Hg, BOD5, As, Cn, Phenol, Zn, pH, 
TKN, Ni, NH3-N, TDS, Cu and Cl- and their corresponding overall  LPI of 7.38. The comparison 
of the leachate characteristics with the standards set for the disposal of treated leachate verifies 
the fact that the leachate generated from Dhaka landfill is highly contaminated and the values of 
LPI for all the selected landfill exceed the LPI of treated leachate of 7.38. The high LPI demands 
that leachate generated from the selected landfill should be treated.The low value of LPI (28.86) 
for the leachate of Rajshahi landfill indicates the relatively lower contaminant potential. 
However, the individual contaminants shall meet the state discharge standards before discharge 
of leachate into any surface water body. Moreover, the relatively highest LPI of 29.54, 33.64 and 
 
 
1167 
37.25, of the three landfill, Khulna, Chittagong and Dhaka respectively, are comparable and 
indicates that the leachate should be treated before discharging. Moreover, it can be depicted that 
the comparatively lower LPI for the landfill sites are attributable to low concentrations of heavy 
metals in the Leachate (Table 3). Landfill age also plays an important role in leachate 
characteristics and hence, influences the LPI value (Kurniawan 2006). 
 
Table 2 Characteristics and LPI of Dhaka and Chittagong solid waste landfill 
 
Pollutant 
concentration, ci 
Individual pollutant 
rating, pi 
Overall pollutant 
rating, wipi 
 
Parameters 
Weight 
factor, 
wi Dhaka Chittagong Dhaka Chittagong Dhaka Chittagong 
COD 0.062 9100 6100 75 63 4.65 3.91 
BOD5 0.061 4100 3050 56 50 3.42 3.05 
Phenol 0.057 5 4.8 10 12 0.57 0.68 
TCB 0.052 13500 10000 92 86 4.78 4.47 
pH 0.055 8.3 8.5 5 5 0.28 0.28 
TKN 0.053 4200 4000 100 100 5.30 5.30 
NH3-N 0.051 900 550 70 58 3.57 2.96 
TDS 0.05 2000 1723 60 40 3.00 2.00 
Chlorides 0.048 2600 2100 15 12 0.72 0.58 
Chromium 0.064 21 18.5 100 95 6.40 6.08 
Lead 0.063 0.45 0.45 7 6 0.44 0.38 
Mercury 0.062 0.4 0.4 45 45 2.79 2.79 
Arsenic 0.061 0.01 0.01 5 5 0.31 0.31 
Cyanide 0.058 1.4 1.3 12 12 0.70 0.70 
Zinc 0.056 18 17.8 6 7 0.34 0.39 
Nickel 0.052 0.048 0.078 5 5 0.26 0.26 
Copper 0.05 5.8 5.6 48 50 2.40 2.50 
Total Iron 0.045 5.5       4.7 5 5 0.23 0.23 
Total 1.000   801 744 40.14 36.85 
Derived LPI       40.14 36.85 
 
The variation of overall LPI of the selected landfill against leachate sampling period is shown in 
Figure 5. Based on Figure 5, it can be seen that in case of Dhaka landfill, the LPI was found 
higher than that of other studied landfill. The results indicate that the Dhaka landfill has high LPI 
value in comparison with the three landfill Rajshahi, Khulna, and Chittagong and therefore, it has 
relatively more contamination potential. Based on the evaluated results, the LPI was found 40.14, 
38.54, 43.21, 39.62, 37.25 for Dhaka Matuail landfill, 38.85, 35.63, 30.52, 32.87, 33.64 for 
Chittagong landfill, 33.67, 31.53, 28.54, 26.35, 29.54 for Khulna landfill and 32.48, 30.15, 28.45, 
27.5, 28.86 for Rajshahi landfill against the leachate sampling period. 
 
 
 
1168 
                      
 
Figure 4 Variation of derived LPI of selected landfill 
 
Table 3 Characteristics and LPI of Rajshahi and Khulna solid waste landfill 
 
Pollutant 
concentration 
Individual pollutant 
rating, pi 
Overall pollutant 
rating, wipi 
 
Parameters 
Weight 
Factor, wi 
Khulna Rajshahi Khulna Rajshahi Khulna Rajshahi 
COD 0.062 6868 7120 68 70 4.22 4.34 
BOD5 0.061 2890 2518 54 47 3.29 2.87 
Phenol 0.057 3.5 3.2 10 8 0.57 0.46 
TCB 0.052 9000 6000 87 86 4.52 4.47 
pH 0.055 8.1 8.3 4 6 0.22 0.33 
TKN 0.053 3200 3000 100 98 5.30 5.19 
NH3-N 0.051 450 400 47 43 2.40 2.19 
TDS 0.05 1150 888 12 7 0.60 0.35 
Chlorides 0.048 1700 1500 10 8 0.48 0.38 
Chromium 0.064 14 12.4 91 90 5.82 5.76 
Lead 0.063 0.45 0.45 5 5 0.32 0.32 
Mercury 0.062 0.3 0.3 40 40 2.48 2.48 
Arsenic 0.061 0.01 0.01 5 5 0.31 0.31 
Cyanide 0.058 1 1 10 10 0.58 0.58 
Zinc 0.056 12 11.2 5.1 4.9 0.29 0.27 
Nickel 0.052 0.04 0.032 4 4 0.21 0.21 
Copper 0.05 4 4.1 37 35 1.85 1.75 
Total Iron 0.045 4.2 4.6 5 5 0.23 0.23 
Total 1.000   594 571.9 33.67 32.48 
Derived LPI      33.67 32.48 
All values in mg/L except pH and total coliform; total coliform unit (cfu/100ml); 
COD=chemical oxygen demand, BOD5=biological oxygen demand, TKN=total kjendhal 
nitrogen, TCB= total coliform bacteria and TDS=total dissolve solid, NH3-N=Ammonia nitrogen 
 
 
 
1169 
 
 
Figure 5 Variation of overall LPI of landfill against sampling period. 
 
4.3. Interpretation of Parameters involved in LPI in Solid Waste Landfill 
 
The observed result reveals that COD, pH and Cu is high in Rajshahi landfill than that of Khulna 
landfill, while BOD5 and TKN, chromium is significantly higher in Khulna landfill than Rajshahi 
landfill (Table 3). Moreover, The COD, BOD5, Phenol, TCB, TDS and chloride were 
significantly higher for Dhaka landfill, in comparison to Rajshahi and Khulna landfill. A 
significant difference between individual and cumulative pollution ratings for both the landfill of 
Dhaka and Rajshahi, was observed due to the distinct difference in their concentrations.  The 
concentration of heavy metals (Cu and Ni) was fairly similar for both the Rajshahi and Khulna 
landfill. Although these two landfills exhibited notable differences for chlorides and TCB, but the 
influence of individual and cumulative pollution ratings is insignificant. The Cr and Zn in 
Chittagong landfill were higher than that of Rajshahi landfill which resulted in significantly 
higher cumulative pollution rating.  
As the individual pollution ratings of BOD5, TKN, TCB, TDS and chloride were lower for 
Rajshahi landfill, the cumulative pollution rating of Rajshahi landfill was consequently lower. 
The concentrations of COD, TKN, TCB, TDS, chloride, pH, Cr, Pb, Zn and Fe represent a 
significant difference between Chittagong landfill and Khulna landfill. The higher COD, Zn, 
TKN, TDS, Pb, Ni and Fe of Dhaka landfill imply higher individual and cumulative pollution 
rating and consequently higher LPI than Chittagong landfill. Moreover, the TDS in Dhaka 
landfill was more than 1.25 times higher than Rajshahi landfill, and the cumulative pollution 
rating for TDS in Dhaka landfill was 3.0 times higher than Rajshahi landfill. The pH, Pb, Ni, Cu 
and Fe in Khulna landfill were higher than the Rajshahi landfill, which resulted in significantly 
higher cumulative pollution rating. All the concentrations except pH and Cu were lower for 
Rajshahi landfill than that of Dhaka, Chittagong and Khulna landfill has lowest individual and 
cumulative pollution rating and consequently lower LPI. 
 
5. Conclusions 
 
The LPI provides a meaningful method of evaluating the leachate contamination potential of 
solid waste landfill. Here, it can be noted that among the selected four landfill sites Dhaka 
landfill has the highest LPI in compare to the other studied landfill. Moreover, the overall LPI 
 
 
1170 
was found to be higher for all the studied landfll. The high LPI demands that leachate generated 
from the selected landfill should be treated before discharging in to the water bodies.  
 
References 
 
Abbas, A. A., Jingsong, G., Ping,L.Z., Ya, P. Y. and Al-Rekabi, W. S. (2009). Review on landfill 
leachate treatments. Journal of Applied Science Research, vol. 5, no.5, pp.534-545. 
Al-Yaqout,A.F., and Hamoda, M.F.(2003).Evaluation of landfill leachate in arid climate-a case 
study. Environment International, vol.29, no 5, pp. 593-600. 
 Baun,  D. L. and  Christensen , T. H. (2004). Speciation of heavy metals in landfill leachate: a 
review. Waste Management and Research, vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 3-23.  
Belevi H., and Baccini  P. (1989). Long-Term Behavior of  Municipal  Solid  Waste  Landfills.  
Waste Management & Research Vol. 7: Pp 43-56. 
Bohdziewicz J. and Kwarciak A. (2008) The application of hybrid system USAB reactor –RO in 
landfill leachate treatment. Desalination vol.222, no. 1-3, pp.128-134. 
 Bowman, M. S., Clune, T. S. and Sutton, B. G. (2002). Sustainable management of landfill 
leachate by irrigation. Water, Air and Soil Pollution, vol.134, no. 1-4, pp. 81-96.  
Christensen,T.H., Kjeldsen,P., Bjerg, P.L., et al.(2001).Biogeochemistry of Landfill Leachate 
Plumes. Applied Geochemistry,vol.29, no. 5, pp. 659-728. 
Dalkey, N. C. (1968). DELPHI. The Rand Corporation. 
Deng, Y. and Englehardt, J. D. (2007). Electrochemical oxidation for landfill leachate 
treatment.Waste Management, vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 380-388.  
 Foo,K.Y. and Hameed,B.H.(2009). An overview of landfill leachate treatment via activated 
carbon absorption prosess. Journal of Hazardous Materials, vol.171.n0 1-3, pp.54-60. 
Freeze R. A., and Cherry J. A. (1979) .Groundwater. Prentice-Hall Inc., Englewood Cliffs, NJ. 
Government of India (ed.) (2000).Municipal Solid Wastes (Management and Handling) Rules. 
The Gazette of India, Ministry of Env. and Forests, Gov. of India, Delhi, India. 
Jensen, D. L. and Christensen, T. H. (1999),Colloidal and dissolved metals in leachates from four 
Danish landfills. Water Research, vol. 33, no. 33, no. 9, pp. 2139-2147.  
Jones-Lee, A. and Lee, G. F. (1993).Groundwater Pollution by Municipal Landfills: Leachate 
Composition, Detection   and   Water   Quality   Significance. Proceedings Sardinia 1993,   IV 
International Landfill Symposium, Sardinia, Italy, Pp. 1093-1103. 
Kjeldsen P. and Christophersen M. C. (2001). Composition of leachate from old landfills in 
Denmark Waste Managemant and Research. vol19, no. 3, pp 249-256.  
koshy L., Jones T.  (2008). Bioreactivty of municipal solid waste landfill leachate Hormesis and 
DNA damage. Water Research, vol. 42, no. 8-9, pp 2177-2183. 
Kulikowska D. and Klimuil E. (2008). The effect of landfill age on municipal leachate 
composition. Bioresource Technology, vol. 99, no. 13, pp. 5981–5985. 
Kumar, D., and  Alappat, B.J. (2003). A Technique t o  Q uant i f y L a n d f i l l  Leachate  
Pollution . Ninth International Landfill Symposium, October 2003, Cagliari, Italy. 
 Kurniawan, T. A., Lo, W. H. and Chan, G. Y. S. (2006). Physicochemical treatments for removal 
of recalcitrant contaminants from landfill leachate. J. of Hazardous Materials B, vol.129, no. 
1-3, pp. 80-100.  
 Leckie, J.O., Pacey, J.G., and Halvadakis, C. (1979). Landfill Management with Moisture 
Control. ASCE Journal of Environmental Engineering. Division, Vol. 105 (2) Pp. 337-355. 
 Li, X. Z. and Zhao, Q. L. (2002). Map precipitation from landfill leachate and seawater bitten 
waste. Environmental Technology, vol. 23, no.9, pp. 989-1000.  
 
 
1171 
 Marttinen, S. K., Kettunen, R. H. and Rintala, J. A. (2003). Occurrence and removal of organic 
pollutants in sewages and landfill leachates. Science of total Env, vol. 301, no. 1-3, pp. 1-12.  
Masters, S. And Alappat, B.J. (2006) Introduction to environmental Engineering and Science. 
Prince-Hall, New Delhi, India. 
Rafizul, I. M., Alamgir, M. and Islam, M. M. (2011). Evaluation of Contamination Potential of 
Sanitary Landfill Lysimeter using Leachate Pollution Index. Thirteenth International Waste 
Management and Landfill Symposium, Sardinia 2011, Cagliari, Italy, 3-7 October. 
Statom, R. A., Thyne, G. D. and McCray, J. E. (2004). Temporal changes in leachate chemistry 
of a municipal solid waste landfill cell in Florida. USA, Env. Geology, vol. 45, no. 7, pp. 1-12.  
Tatsi A. A. and Zouboulis A. I., (2002). A field investigation of the quantity and quality of 
leachate from a municipal solid waste landfill in Mediterranean climate (Thessaloniki, 
Greece). Advances in Evironmental Research, vol.no.3 pp 207-219. 
 Tatsi, A. A., Zouboulos, A. I., Matis, K. A. and Samaras, P. (2003).Coagulation-floculaton 
pretreatment of salinity landfill leachates. Chemosphere, vol. 53, pp. 737-744.  
Techobanoglous, G., Theisen, H.and Vigil, S. (1993). Intregrated Solid Waste Managemant. 
McGraw-Hill, Inc. Singapore. 
 
1172 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
GEOTECHNICAL CHARACTERIZATION OF RECONSTITUTED ORGANIC SOIL 
OF THE SELECTED SITE AT SOUTH-WESTERN REGION OF BANGLADESH 
 
 
Islam M. Rafizul1 and Muhammed Alamgir2 
 
 
ABSTRACT: This study illustrates the experimental investigation into the effect of organic 
content on the geotechnical parameters of reconstituted soils prepared in the laboratory by 
adjusting the different proportion of inorganic and organic soil. The disturbed soil samples were 
collected from two selected locations at Khulna region. Then, reconstituted soil having organic 
content of 5 to 35% were prepared in the laboratory to mix at various proportions of inorganic 
and organic soil at the water content equal to 1.25 times of liquid limits .The usual procedure of 
preparation of soil slurry, deposition in a mold and application of surcharge were used to 
reconstitute sample. The mold diameter was 152mm and height 222mm and applied ultimate 
surcharge was about 60kN/m2. In the laboratory, ASTM (2004) methods were followed for the 
determination of engineering properties in terms of physical, compressibility and strength 
properties of reconstituted soils at varying organic content. Results showed that engineering 
properties have influenced significantly with the increase of organic content in reconstituted soil. 
Moreover, the statistical analysis for engineering properties with organic content gave good 
correlations which can be expressed in terms of equations that may be proposed to estimate the 
various properties of soil of Khulna region using its organic content. 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Khulna region is situated at the southwestern part of Bangladesh near the world largest mangrove 
forest, Sundarbans. The sub-soil of this region consists of fine-grained soils with a considerable 
part of decomposed and semi-decomposed organic matter (Alamgir et al. 2006). In this region, 
the soft soil deposit extends up to a considerable depth, as a result the recent alluvial deposits 
with organic composition creates problem to geotechnical engineers in designing economic 
foundations to construct the required infrastructure (Rafizul et al. 2010). Due to presence of thick 
organic soil layers, the civil engineering constructions in such sites need special attention to 
against possible shear failure as well as total and differential settlement. To quantify the effects of 
such organic deposits on the adopted foundation systems, it is required to establish the behavior 
of organic contents with the soil parameters. In Khulna region, the organic soil layer exists in 
most of the places within a depth of 10 to 25 ft below the existing ground surface (Rafizul et al. 
                                                        
1Assistant Professor, Department of Civil Engineering, Khulna University of Engineering & Technology 
(KUET), Bangladesh, E-mail: imrafizul@yahoo.com 
2Professor, Department of Civil Engineering, Khulna University of Engineering & Technology (KUET), 
Bangladesh, E-mail:alamgir63dr@yahoo.com 
1173 
 
2009). Moreover, the nature of organic contents and geotechnical properties of this soil are found 
to vary from place to place. The soil is also erratic in nature both in the vertical and horizontal 
directions. The bearing capacity of this soil is very low and always leads to adopt a costly 
foundation for the construction of infra-structures. To understand the characteristics of such 
organic soil deposits, detailed information about the soil formation, composition and geotechnical 
characteristics are required to evaluate (Rafizul et al. 2006). To acquire appropriate understanding, 
it is necessary to analyze them not only through geotechnical engineering skills but also through 
other associated disciplines like soil types, composition, fabrics and structures, depositional 
environment, stress history and physical and mechanical properties, geomorphology, climatology 
and other earth and atmosphere related sciences (Fauzial et al. 2006; Rakmi et al.1995; Soon et al. 
2003). To these attempts, it is essential to conduct a comprehensive study for understanding the 
characteristics of soil deposits and to establish empirical correlations among the engineering parameters in 
relation to the variation of organic content. In this study, disturbed soil from two selected locations of 
Khulna region was collected to prepare reconstituted soils at varying organic content. One sample has 38% 
and another one contains 6% of organic content. Moreover, six different samples of reconstituted soil for 
the organic content of about 6, 15, 20, 25, 30 and 35% and were prepared in the laboratory by adjusting the 
different proportions of low and high content organic samples to obtain the wide range of organic content. 
The reconstituted soils at each designed organic content stated earlier, were prepared in the laboratory 
based on the procedure followed by Burland (1990). In the laboratory, ASTM (2004) methods were 
followed to conduct the tests of Atterberg limit, moisture and organic content, unit weight, specific gravity, 
unconfined compression test, sieve and hydrometer analysis as well as consolidation test to evaluate the 
engineering properties of reconstituted soil. Based on the observed results, empirical correlations of various 
parameters with organic contents of reconstituted soils were established. 
 
2. Laboratory Investigations 
 
The disturbed soil samples were collected from two selected locations of Khulna region. One 
from Beel Dakatia, 2 km away from KUET campus, at a depth of about 10 feet and another from 
KUET campus at a depth of about 10 feet from the existing ground surface as shown in Figure 1. 
The detailed methodology followed for this laboratory investigation can be obtained in Rafizul 
(2006) and also in Rafizul et al. (2010) and presented in Figure 2. The physical properties of the 
samples were determined by ASTM (2004) methods as given in Table 1. 
 
Table1 Physical properties of soil used to prepare reconstituted soils 
 Note: OC=organic content, w=moisture content, wL=liquid limit, wP=plastic limit, Gs=specific gravity and 
USCS=Unified Soil Classification System. 
Percentages of constituted soil 
particles in samples   
Location 
 
OC 
(%) 
 
w 
(%) 
 
wL 
(%) 
 
wP 
(%) 
Gs 4.75-
0.076mm 
0.076-
0.002mm 
<0.002 
mm 
 
USCS 
Symbol 
KUET 
campus 
6 21 27 18 2.75 6.0 53.8 40.2 ML 
Beel 
Dakatia 
38 192 86 76 2.0 38.0 49.5 15.5 OH 
1174 
 
 
 
Figure 1 Location of soil samples used to prepare reconstituted soils 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                          
Figure 2 Flow chart of laboratory investigation 
N 
  KUET Campus 
    Beel Dakatia   
Mixing of two Samples in Different Proportions to 
obtain Samples of Different Organic Contents 
Crushed of Air-dried Samples into 
Powder Form 
Sieved the Soil Samples through Sieve # 16 
 Preparation of Soil Slurry with Water Content of 1.25 times of LL  
Reconstituted Organic Soil 
Determination of Physical and Index 
Properties of Soil Samples 
Ko-consolidation to obtain Large Dia. (152.4 mm) Samples 
Collection of Disturbed Soil Samples  
Characterization of Reconstituted Soil in 
terms of Physical, Compressibility, 
Strength and Compaction Properties 
1175 
 
2.1 Preparation of Soil Slurry 
 
In this study, the samples were first air-dried and then powdered. The powered samples were then 
sieved through No 16 sieve and the samples were then mixed with a water content equal to 1.25 
times of liquid limits which was found as sufficient to yield uniform and homogeneous slurry. 
Generally No. 40 sieve is used for making reconstituted inorganic soils by various researchers, 
such as Bashar (2002), however, in this study a standard sieve of larger opening size i.e. No. 16 
sieve was used to obtain a better representative reconstituted organic soils. Details of soil slurry 
and test specimen preparation can be obtained in Rafizul (2010) and also in Alamgir et al. (2006). 
 
2.2 Consolidation of Slurry 
 
The slurry was consolidated to form a uniform reconstituted soil cake in a cylindrical 
consolidation mold of 152mm diameter 
and 222mm height as shown in the Figure 
3. The required axial load of 60kN/m2 was 
gradually applied to the sample using a 
loading frame initially the slurry was 
allowed to consolidate by the self-weight 
and the weight of the porous metal discs 
for about 24 hours. Then a small pressure 
of 3kN/m2 was applied to the sample for 
the next 24 hours. Similarly, the pressure 
was increased gradually by about 3, 5, 8, 
12, 15, 20, 25, 30, 40, 50 and ultimately to 
the final value of 60kN/m2. This pressure 
of 60kN/m2 was maintained until the end 
of primary consolidation. After the 
completion of consolidation, a soil cake of 
about 114 to 127mm length and 152mm 
diameter was obtained from the 
reconstitute soils. 
 
2.3 Selection of Overburden Pressure 
 
Earlier, the minimum pre-consolidation pressure of 276kN/m2 that make the clay soil just stiff 
enough and latter as the skill in testing it was found of 150kN/m2 (Kirkpatrick and Khan 1984). 
Singh (1992) suggested that soil containing high organic matter shows large volume changes on 
loading and expulsion of water, low shear strength and low dry density. In addition, the 
reconstituted organic soil is fully decomposed with normally loaded state and shows highly 
compressible phenomena. The reconstituted soils were prepared in Ko-consolidation cell by a 
consolidation pressure of 60kN/m2.  
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3 An arrangement for preparation of 
reconstitute soil sample 
Dial Gauge 
 Loading Frame 
 Dead Load 
  Cylindrical Mold 
Drainage path 
1176 
 
3. Organic Contents in the Reconstituted Soil 
 
It was intended to prepare reconstituted soil at the organic contents of about 6, 15, 20, 25, 30 and 
38% by mixing the soil samples collected from KUEL campus and Beel Dakatia. However, the 
soil samples of organic content of 6% and 
38% were obtained as the samples from 
KUET campus and Beel Dakatia, respectively, 
without any mixing. Although slurry was 
prepared to achieve such organic content, but 
after prepared reconstituted soil in the 
laboratory, the measured organic content 
were rounded as 5, 12, 17, 21, 28 and 35%, 
respectively, against to that of predetermined 
organic content. The reconstituted organic 
soils at each designed organic content were 
prepared in the laboratory based on the 
procedure followed by Burland (1990).  The 
Figure 4 represents the variation of measured 
organic contents in reconstituted samples 
with mixing organic contents in slurry and 
from the figure, it can be perceived that the organic content in all reconstituted soil samples were 
measured about 93% to that of mixing during the preparation of slurry.  
 
4. Results and Discussions 
 
The reconstituted soils at varying organic content as prepared were tested in the laboratory to 
investigate the geotechnical characterization in terms of physical, compressibility and strength 
properties and hence discussed in following. 
 
4.1 Physical properties of reconstituted organic soil 
 
The reconstituted soils at varying organic content were tested in the laboratory to investigate the 
physical states in terms of liquid limit (wL%), plastic limit (wp%), moisture content (w%), initial 
void ratio (eo), bulk unit weight ( kN/m3) and specific gravity (Gs). However, their variation at 
varying organic content from 5 to 35% as presented in Table 2 and hence discussed in followings. 
 
Table 2 Physical properties at varying organic content of reconstituted soils 
 
OC (%) wL (%) wp (%) Ip Gs w (%)  (kN/m3) e0 
5 34 22 12 2.7 21 18.05 1.26 
12 36 31 5 2.68 35 16.38 1.35 
17 52 47 5 2.6 47 15.50 1.47 
21 57 50 7 2.35 58 15.40 1.61 
28 66 58 8 2.06 49 15.21 1.76 
35 86 75 11 2.04 192 14.62 1.94 
Figure 4 Organic content in reconstituted soil 
versus mixing organic contents in slurry 
 
OC)Measured = 0.956*OC)Mixing - 1.697
R² = 0.993
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
0 10 20 30 40
M
ea
su
re
d 
or
ga
ni
c 
co
nt
en
t i
n 
re
co
ns
tit
ut
ed
 
sa
m
pl
e,
 O
C
 (%
)
Mixing organic content in slurry, OC (%)
1177 
 
4.1.1 Analysis of liquid limit  
The variation of liquid limit (wL) in relation to the increasing of organic content of reconstituted 
soil is shown in Figure 5. The Figure 5 reveals that the values of wL has increased significantly 
from 34 to 52% with the increase of organic content from 5 to 17% and the rate of increase is 
moderate. In addition, the figure also reveals that the wL has increased significantly from 52 to 
86% with the increase of organic contents from 17 to 35% and the rate of increase was found as 
higher than the trend for the organic content of 5 to 17%. In case of 17 to 35% organic content, 
regression coefficient, R2=0.995 is more accurate than that of 5 to 17% OC, i.e. the measured 
OC, 17 to 35% was closer than 5 to 17%.   Edil (1997) suggested that if the value of organic 
content of soils lies in between 6 to 20%, it 
behaves as like as organic silts and clays. In 
addition, he also postulated that if the organic 
content of soils lies in between 21 to 74%, 
organic matter governs properties as the clayey 
organic soil. Here, it can be concluded that the 
findings in case of present study were agreed 
well with the postulation given by Edil (1997). 
Moreover, the liquid limit changes depend on 
the aggregates or the clusters of the basic units 
that interact to develop the strength in the soils, 
the average adsorbed water layer thickness and 
the average size of intermolecular pores in the 
soils (Rafizul et al. 2010). As a result the liquid 
limit changes due to the variation of organic 
contents. 
 
4.1.2 Analysis of moisture content 
The variation of moisture content (w) with the variation of organic content is shown in Figure 6. 
From this figure, it can be signified that the values of w has increased significantly from 21 to 
47% with the increase of organic contents from 5 to 17% and the rate of increase was moderate. 
In addition, the figure also reveals that the w has increased significantly from 47 to 90% with the 
increase of organic contents from 17 to 35% 
and the rate of increase was found as higher 
than the trend for the organic content from 5 
to 17%.  Edil (1997) suggested that if the 
value of organic content of soils lies in 
between 6 to 20%, it affects the properties of 
organic silts and clays. In addition, he also 
postulated that if the organic content of soils 
lies in between 21 to 74%, organic matter 
governs properties as the clayey organic soil. 
The findings in case of present study were 
agreed well with the postulation given by 
Edil (1997). Natural moisture content of a 
soil depends on its water holding capacity. A 
fine- grained soil can exist in several states in 
which the state depends on the amount of 
Figure 5 Variation of wL with organic 
content reconstituted soil. 
 
wL = 1.422*OC + 24.55
R² = 0.754 (OC: 5 to 17)
wL = 1.847*OC + 18.59
R² = 0.955 (OC: 17 to 35)
0
20
40
60
80
100
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40
L
iq
ui
d 
lim
it,
 w
L
(%
)
Organic content , OC (%)
Organic content, OC (%): 5 to 17
Organic content, OC (%): 17 to 35
Figure 6 Variation of moisture content with 
organic content of reconstituted soil. 
w = 2.156*OC  + 9.899
R² = 0.997 (OC: 5 to 17)
w = 2.002*OC + 10.43
R² = 0.636 (OC: 17 to 35) 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40
M
oi
st
ur
e 
co
nt
en
t, 
w
  (
%
)
Organic content, OC (%) 
Organic content, OC (%): 5 to 17
Organic content, OC (%): 17 to 35
1178 
 
water in soil system (Lambe 1969). So, it increases in reconstituted soils with increasing of 
organic contents. 
 
3.1.3 Variation of initial void ratio  
The variation of initial void ratio (eo) with the 
increase of organic content is shown in Figure 
7. The figure shows that there is a definite 
increasing trend of eo as a linear variation with 
the increase of organic contents. Here, eo has 
increased significantly from 1.26 to 1.47 and 
1.47 to 1.94 with the increase of organic 
contents from 5 to 17% and 17 to 35%, 
respectively. The finding is in good agreement 
with the general behavior of eo versus organic 
contents. In organic soil the void space is more 
and filled up by air or/and water. Oades (1989) 
described that physical properties are changed 
significantly with organic contents.  
 
 
3.2 Compressibility properties of reconstituted Soil 
 
The main purpose of consolidation tests is to obtain the data that may be used in predicting the 
rate and the amount of settlement of structures. Conducting a series of Ko-consolidation tests in 
the laboratory the compressibility parameters in terms of compression index (Cc) and coefficient 
of consolidation (Cv), as well as primary consolidation period were obtained at varying organic 
contents of 5 to 35% in the reconstituted soils and hence discussed in followings.  
 
 
3.2.1 Analysis of compression index 
The variation of compression index (Cc) with organic contents is evident in Figure 8. From the 
figure, it can be perceived that the values of Cc 
has increased significantly from 0.28 to 0.42 with 
the increase of organic content from 5 to 17% and 
the rate of increase was flatter. In addition, the 
figure also revealed that the Cc has increased 
significantly from 0.42 to 0.51 with the increase 
of organic content from 17 to 35% and the rate of 
increase was found as higher than the trend for 
the organic content of 5 to 17%. Here, it can be 
noted that the regression coefficient R2=0.934 and 
0.839 was found, for the organic content of 5 to 
17% and 17 to 35%, respectively. Edil (1997) 
suggested that if the value of organic content lies 
in between 6 to 20%, it behaves of organic silts 
and clays. In addition, he also postulated that if 
the organic content lies in the rage of 21 to 74%, 
Figure 7 Variation of initial void ratio with 
organic content of reconstituted soil. 
 
eo = 0.017*OC + 1.165
R² = 0.968 (OC: 5 to 17)
eo = 0.025x + 1.054
R² = 0.993 (OC: 17 to 35)
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40
In
iti
al
 v
oi
d 
ra
tio
, e
o
Organic content, OC (%) 
Organic content, OC (%): 5 to 17
Organic content, OC (%): 17 to 35
Figure 8 Variation of compression index 
with organic content of reconstituted soil. 
Cc = 0.011*OC + 0.214
R² = 0.934 (OC: 5 to 17)
Cc = 0.004*OC + 0.330
R² = 0.839 (OC: 17 to 35)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40
C
om
pr
es
si
on
 in
de
x,
 C
c
Organic content, OC (%) 
Organic content, OC (%): 5 to 17
Organic content, OC (%): 17 to 35
1179 
 
it behaves of clayey organic soil. The findings of the present study agree well with the postulation 
given by Edil (1997). To predict the amount of settlement, knowledge on Cc of soil must be 
understood to solve the soil engineering problems (Lambe, 1969). However, the amount of 
settlement of a soil mass depends on its composition and its pore spaces.  
 
Table 3 Coefficient of consolidation with organic content under applied pressure 
 
3.2.2 Analysis of coefficient of consolidation with organic content 
The variation of coefficient of consolidation (Cv) with the increase of organic content as 
presented in Table 3 and also in Figure 9. The figure illustrates that there was an increasing trend 
of Cv with the increase of organic contents. The figure depicts that at a particular applied pressure, 
say 100kPa, the value of Cv has changed from 0.0037 to 0.0308 cm2/sec for the increase of 
organic content from 5 to 35%. Similar increasing trend of Cv was also observed for other applied 
pressure ranging from 25 to 800kPa. Here, it can be concluded that the values of Cv was found as 
insignificant for low organic content and then significant for high organic content. The value of 
Cv depends on organic matter, permeability, void ratio, Cc and applied pressure (Lambe 1969). 
Moreover, due to induced organic matter in the soil mass, the Cv has changed significantly, with 
respect to the applied pressure. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.2.3 Analysis of coefficient of consolidation with applied pressure  
The variation of coefficient of consolidation (Cv) with the increase of applied pressure for 
Coefficient of Consolidation, Cv (cm2/sec) for different Applied Pressure,  (kPa) OC 
(%) 25.00 50.00 100.00 200.00 400.00 800.00 
5 0.0024 0.0028 0.0037 0.0070 0.0106 0.0117 
12 0.0040 0.0047 0.0063 0.0109 0.0123 0.0188 
17 0.0107 0.0117 0.0153 0.0217 0.0237 0.0248 
21 0.0119 0.0132 0.0164 0.0226 0.0253 0.0300 
28 0.0109 0.0123 0.0159 0.0221 0.0245 0.0281 
35 0.0135 0.0169 0.0308 0.0465 0.0600 0.1200 
Figure 9 Variation of Cv with organic content at 
varying pre-consolidation pressure. 
 
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40
C
oe
ff
ic
ie
nt
 o
f c
on
so
lid
at
io
n,
 C
v 
(c
m
2 /
se
c)
Organic content , OC (%)
25
50
100
200
400
800
Applied pressure (kPa)= 
Figure 10 Variation of Cv with applied 
pressure at varying organic content. 
 
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
0 200 400 600 800 1000
C
oe
ff
ic
ie
nt
 o
f c
on
so
lid
at
io
n 
C
v 
(c
m
2 /s
ec
)
Applied pressure (kPa)
5
12
17
21
28
35
Organic content, OC (%) 
 
1180 
 
different organic contents as depicted in Figure 10. The figure reveals that there was an 
increasing trend of Cv with the increase of applied pressure at varying organic content. For the 
organic content of 35%, the value of Cv increases from 0.0135 to 0.120cm2/sec for the increase of 
applied pressure from 25 to 800kPa. Similar degree of increment was also observed for the other 
organic content. 
 
Table 4 Primary consolidation period with the increase of organic content in reconstituted soil 
 
3.2.4 Analysis of primary consolidation period with organic content  
The variation of primary consolidation period (t) with the variation of organic content at varying 
applied pressure is presented in Table 4 and also in Figure 11. The figure shows that there was a 
decreasing trend of t, for the increase of organic content at varying organic content. For the 
applied pressure 100kPa, the value of t, decreases from 6.20 to 0.74mins. for the increase of 
organic contents of 5 to 35%. Similar degree of decrement was also observed for the other 
applied pressure. The figure also depicts that the values of t, was found insignificant at high 
pressure and then it was significant for low pressure. The organic soils generally posses low shear 
strength and high compressibility and the time required for primary consolidation has varied 
significantly with the change of applied pressure and organic content (Rafizul et al. 2010). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.2.5 Analysis of primary consolidation period with applied pressure  
The values of t, of reconstituted soil with the increase of applied pressure as presented in Figure 
Primary Consolidation Period, t (mins.) for different Applied Pressure,  (kPa)  
OC  
(%) 25.00  50.00  100.00  200.00 400.00 800.00 
5 9.67 8.23 6.2 3.25 2.16 1.95 
12 5.68 4.89 3.62 2.09 1.86 1.21 
17 2.13 1.95 1.49 1.05 0.96 0.92 
21 1.92 1.73 1.39 1.01 0.9 0.76 
28 2.09 1.85 1.43 1.03 0.93 0.81 
35 1.69 1.35 0.74 0.49 0.38 0.19 
Figure 11 Variation of primary consolidation 
period with the increase of organic contents. 
 
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
0 10 20 30 40
P
rim
ar
y 
co
ns
ol
id
at
io
n 
pe
ri
od
 , 
t (
m
in
)
Organic content , OC (%)
25
50
100
200
400
800
Applied pressure (kPa)
Figure 12 Variation of primary consolidation 
period at varying applied pressure. 
 
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
0 200 400 600 800 1000
P
ri
m
ar
y 
co
ns
ol
id
at
io
n 
pe
ri
od
 , 
t (
m
in
)
Applied pre-consolidation pressure (kPa)
5
12
17
28
35
Organic content, OC (%)
1181 
 
12. The figure depicts that there was a trend of non-linear variation of the decrease of t, with the 
increase of applied pressure in all percentages of organic contents. For the organic contents of 
35%, the value of t, decreases from 1.69 to 0.19 mins. for the increase of applied pressure from 
25 to 800kPa. Similar degree of decrement is also observed for the other organic contents. From 
the figure it can be concluded that the values of t, was found significant at low organic content 
and then insignificant for the high organic content. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.3 Strength properties of reconstituted soil 
 
The strength behavior in terms of stress-strain behavior and undrained shear strength at varying 
organic content of 5 to 35% has been established by conducting the unconfined compression test. 
The findings were presented and hence discussed in followings. 
 
3.3.1 Stress-strain behavior 
The evaluated stress-strain behavior at varying organic content is presented in Figure 13. The 
figure reveals that the stress was increased with the increase of axial strain and showing almost 
similar behavior for the reconstituted soils at any organic contents. The figure also depicts that 
the strength decreases with the increase of organic contents.  
 
3.3.2 Analysis of undrained shear strength  
The undrained shear strength (su) varies with the increase of organic contents as shown in Figure 
14. Results showed that su has decreased significantly from 41.0 to 18.34kPa for the increase of 
organic content from 5 to 35%. Moreover, the su is a function of organic content for a natural soil 
and soil peat mixtures and also the interconnected bonding of soil particles i.e. the cementing 
bonding (Franklin et al. 1973).  In organic soils, the particles interconnected contracts have 
established within organic matters. As the organic matter bears low strength and high 
compressibility, the strength properties of soil reduced with increase of organic content. 
 
3.4 Analysis of constituents of soil particles  
 
The particle size distribution of reconstituted soil has been established by conducting the 
Figure 13 Deviator stress and axial strain of 
reconstituted soils at varying organic content 
 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0 5 10 15 20 25
D
ev
ia
to
r s
tre
ss
, Δ
σ 
(k
Pa
)
Axial strain εa (%)
35
28
21
17
12
5
Organic content, OC (%)
Figure 14 Variation of undrained shear strength 
with organic content of reconstituted soil. 
 
su = -0.819*OC + 46.35
R² = 0.944
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40
U
n
d
ra
in
ed
 s
h
ea
r 
 s
tr
en
gt
h
, s
u
(k
P
a)
Organic content, OC (%)
1182 
 
combined method of sieve and hydrometer analysis for the organic contents of about 5 to 42%. 
The distribution pattern and the percentage of constituted soil particles against the variation of 
organic content of reconstituted soils was represented and hence discussed in followings.  
 
3.4.1 Grain size distribution curve 
The particle size distribution for the organic content of about 5 to 35% of reconstituted soils as 
presented in Figure 15. The Figure 15 reveals that the relationship of percent finer and particle 
diameter showing almost similar pattern for all reconstituted organic soils.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
However, as the organic contents increase, the diameter of the particle size increases for the same 
percentage of finer. From Figure 16, it can be revealed that for the percent of finer of 70%, the 
diameter of particle size increase from 0.0108 to 0.027mm, at varying organic content of 5 to 
35%. From this figure it can also be seen a well graded shaped curve is obtained for each organic 
contents. 
 
3.4.2 Variation of soil constituents  
The constituted soil particles were categorized into three groups as 4.75 to 0.076 mm., 0.076 to 
0.002 mm and <0.002 mm as shown in Figure 16. The figure reveals that the particle sized of 
4.75 to 0.076mm increases significantly from 5.0 to 35.0% with the increase of organic contents 
of 5 to 35%. The Figure 16 also reveals that the particle sized of 0.076 to 0.002 mm decreases 
significantly from 71.0 to 50% with the increase of organic contents from 5 to 35%. Moreover, 
the particle sized of less than 0.002mm decreases significantly from 24.0 to 15.0% with the 
increase of organic contents of 5 to 35%. Here, it can be noted that the amount of coarser particle 
increases with the increase of organic contents in the reconstituted soils. 
 
4. Verification of the Findings in the Present Study 
Any developed correlation is subjected to verification with the existing literature proposed by the 
other researchers. To these attempts, the relevant statistical model was considered, proposed by 
the other researchers and hence discussed in the following sections. 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0.0010.010.11
Pe
rc
en
t f
in
er
Diameter, D (mm) (log scale)
35
28
21
17
12
5
Organic content, OC (%)
Sieve analysis hydrometer analysis
Figure 15 Grain size distribution of 
reconstituted soil. 
Figure 16 Distribution of soil constituent in 
reconstituted soil at varying organic content. 
 
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
5 12 17 21 28 35
D
is
tr
ib
ut
io
n 
of
 s
oi
l p
ar
tic
le
 (
%
)
Organic content, OC (%)
<0.002mm 0.076-0.002mm 4.75-0.076 mm
1183 
 
4.1 Liquid limit 
  
The increase of liquid limit (wL) with the increase of organic contents as obtained from the 
empirical equation  of (1 a) and (b) proposed in the present study was compared with those of 
results reported by Odell et al. (1960) and hence presented in Figure 17. In the present study, the 
values of wL increases with the increase of organic content and the rate of increase was found as 
flatter up to the organic content 17% and then the rate of increase was also higher in between the 
organic content of 17 to 35% and the finding was found as in good conformity with the general 
performance of liquid limits versus organic contents. The increasing trend of wL with the increase 
of organic contents was found as similar for both the cases, however the rate of increment was 
different. The magnitude of the evaluated results in case of present study and results from 
Alamgir et al (2006) were lower than that of reported by Odell et al. (1960).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The figure  depicted that the value of wL for the reconstituted organic soils, results of Alamgir et 
al. (2006), publish results in case of organic clays increases significantly from 34 to 39, 40 to 55 
and 45 to 67%, respectively, with the increase of organic contents from 5 to 15%. 
 
4.2 Initial void ratio  
 
Figure 18 represents the comparison of predicted results of initial void ratio (eo) obtained from 
the proposed empirical equations (2a) and (2b) with the increase of organic contents was 
compared with those reported by Coutinho and Lacerda (1987). The values of eo as reported by 
Coutinho and Lacerda (1987) increases with the increase of organic contents, and it was also 
observed for the proposed empirical equation, however the rate of increase was different. The 
magnitudes of the measured eo in case of results for Coutinho and Lacerda (1987) was found very 
scatter to each other than the present study which was expected due to the inherent properties of 
in-situ soil. However, an increasing trend also exists. For example, from the figure, it can be seen 
that the value of eo for the reconstituted organic soils, Coutinho and Lacerda (1987) and 
published results by Alamgir et al. (2006) increases significantly from 1.26 to 1.41, 1.0 to 2.90 
and 0.646 to 1.195, respectively, with the increase of organic contents from 5 to 15%. 
 
 
 
Figure 18 Comparison of empirical equation in 
the present study with other sources. 
 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0 10 20 30 40 50
In
iti
al 
vo
id
 ra
tio
, e
o 
Organic content ,OC (%)
Linear (Present study)
Linear ( Continho and Lacerda (1987))
Linear (Alamgir et al.(2006))
Equation 2 (b)Equation 2 (a)
Figure 17 Comparison proposed empirical 
equation with other sources. 
 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0 10 20 30 40 50
Li
qu
id
 L
im
it 
,w
L
(%
)
Organic content ,OC (%)
Linear (Present study)
Linear (Odell et al.(1960))
Linear (Alamgir et al.(2006))
Equation 1 (a)
Equation 1 (b)
1184 
 
4.3 Undrained shear strength 
 
The verification of undrained shear strength (su) at varying percentages of organic content of 
reconstituted soils as expressed in Equation 3 and also shown in Figure 19. The Figure 19 reveals 
that the proposed empirical equation (3), su decreases with the increase of organic content of the 
reconstituted soils.  The results reported by Franklin et al. (1973) in case of reconstituted 
organic soil, was compared with the evaluated results in the present study and it was revealed that 
the su also decreases with the increase of organic content. The factors on which the magnitude of 
su depends on soil types, composition, fabrics and structures, depositional environment, stress 
history and physical and mechanical properties.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Due to these important factors, the results obtained from present study and that of reported by 
Franklin et al. (1973) differs from each other significantly. The results obtained in the present 
study was found as greatly lower than that of the Franklin et al. (1973), which may be due to loss 
of cementation bonding, which did not regain due to short thixotrophy period after remolding. 
From the figure, it can be seen that the value of su for the reconstituted soils, undisturbed soil 
samples and publish results in case of organic clays decreases significantly from 41.0 to 35.5, 
158.5 to 132.50 and 41.5 to 31.5kPa, respectively, with the increase of organic contents from 5 to 
15%. 
 
4.4 Compression index 
 
The compressibility properties, expressed by the parameter-compression index (Cc) was 
expressed an empirical equation of (4 a) and (b) and those of reported by Coutinho and Lacerda 
(1987) and the laboratory test results of reconstitured soil by Alamgir at al. (2006). Figure 20 
illustrate the results for comparison of compression index versus organic contents relationship as 
proposed in the present study and the results reported by Coutinho and Lacerda (1987) and 
Alamgir et al. (2006).  In the present study, the Cc increases with the increase of organic content 
of reconstituted soils and the rate of increase was found as flatter up to the organic content 17% 
and then the rate of increase was also higher in between the organic content of 17 to 35% and the 
finding revealed in good agreement with the general performance of compression index versus 
organic contents. In all cases, the Cc increases with the increase of organic content and the results 
Figure 19 Comparison of the predicted empirical 
equation in the present study with other sources. 
 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
0 10 20 30 40 50
U
nd
ra
in
ed
 sh
ea
r s
tre
ng
th
, s
u
(k
Pa
)
Organic content ,OC (%)
Linear (Present study)
Linear (Franklin et al.(1973))
Linear (Alamgir et al.(2006))
Equation 3
Figure 20 Comparison of proposed equation 
with other sources. 
 
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
0 10 20 30 40 50
Co
m
pr
es
sio
n 
in
de
x,
 C
c 
Organic content ,OC (%)
Linear (Present study)
Linear ( Continho and Lacerda (1987))
Linear (Alamgir et al.(2006))
Equation 4 (b)Equation 4 (a)
1185 
 
were found in good agreement. The results reported by Coutinho and Lacerda (1987) were found 
as higher than that of predicted by the present study and Alamgir et al. (2006). The increasing 
trend of Cc for the increase of organic contents was similar for both the cases and the prediction 
was very close to each other. From the figure, it can be seen that the value of Cc for the 
reconstituted organic soils, Coutinho and Lacerda (1987) and Alamgir et al. (2006) increases 
significantly from 0.19 to 0.40, 0.615 to 1.10 and 0.35 to 0.41, respectively, with the increase of 
organic contents from 5 to 15%. From the figure it was also observed that the increasing rate of 
Cc is 0.143 for the present study with the increase of organic contents from 5 to 15%, while the 
increasing rate of Cc was found 0.357 and 0.485, respectively, for the published results by 
Coutinho and Lacerda (1987) and Alamgir et al. (2006) with the same increase of organic 
contents. The increasing rate of Cc with organic content for present study was relatively lower 
than field and publish results. Due to changes of physical state and the relevant soil parameters, 
the compressibility of reconstituted soil increases with the increase of organic content (Rafizul et 
al. 2009). 
 
5. Conclusions 
 
Based on this study, the following conclusions can be revealed:  
(i) The physical properties such as moisture contents, liquid limits, plastic limits and initial 
void ratio was found to increase, while, the specific gravity decreases in relation to the 
increasing of organic content in reconstituted soil. 
(ii) The shear strength has decreased with the increase of organic content and the stress-strain 
diagram showing the almost similar behavior for all the reconstituted soils. 
(iii) Compression index has increased with the increase of organic content in reconstituted 
soils. Moreover, the coefficient of consolidation has increased for all applied loading 
conditions as well as with the increase of organic content of reconstituted soil. From 
consolidation test, it was concluded that the primary consolidation period has decreased 
for all applied loading conditions and with the increase of organic content. 
(i) Here, it can be concluded that the physical, strength and compressibility properties of 
reconstituted soil at varying organic content can be expressed by a series of empirical 
equations with reasonable degree of accuracy and judgment. Among the proposed 
empirical equations, the following equations (where the symbols bear their usual meanings) 
can be considered as very important, considering the evaluation of most important 
parameters of organic soils. 
(ii) Finally, based on observed results, it can be depicted that the findings in case of present 
study was well agreed with the results populated by the other researchers. 
 
wL = 1.422*OC+ 24.55         for  5% OC 17%....................(1 a) 
wL = 1.847*OC+ 18.59         for  17% OC 35%..................(1 b) 
eo = 0.017*OC+ 1.165          for  5% OC 17%....................(2 a) 
eo = 0.025*OC+ 1.054          for  17% OC 35%..................(2 b) 
su = -0.819*OC+36.35          for  OC = 5 to 35%.......................(3) 
Cc = 0.011*OC+ 0.214          for  5% OC 17%....................(4 a) 
Cc = 0.004*OC+ 0.330          for  17% OC 35%..................(4 b) 
 
 
1186 
 
References 
 
Alamgir, M. Rafizul, I. M. and Bashar, M. A. (2006). Physical Properties of Reconstituted 
Organic Soils at Khulna Region of Bangladesh. 59th Canadian Geotechnical Conf. October 1-
4, 2006 at Vancouver, Balkema, Canada, pp.1-6. 
ASTM 2004. Annual Book of ASTM Standards: Soil and Rock (1).  D420- D4914. Volumes 
04.08 and 04.09, Section 4. 
Bashar, M. A. 2002.  Stress-deformation characteristics of selected coastal soils of Bangladesh 
and their sampling effects. Ph. D. Thesis. Dept. of Civil Engg., BUET, pp. xxvii,6-8, 21.  
Burland, J. B. 1990. The Thirtieth Rankine Lecture: On the compressibility and shear strength of 
natural soils. Geotechnique 40, No.3, pp. 329-378. 
Edil, T. B., 1997, Construction Over Peats and Organic Soils, Proc. Conf. On Recent Advances in 
Soft Soil Engineering, Kuching.  
Fauziah Ahmad,  Ahmad Shukri Yahaya and Mohd Ahmadullah Farooqi (2006). 
Characterization  and Geotechnical Properties of Penang Residual Soils with Emphasis on 
Landslides. American J. of Env. Sciences 2 (4): 121-128, 2006, ISSN 1553-345X. 
Franklin, A.F., Orozco, L.F. and  Semrau, R. (1973). Compaction of slightly organic Soils. J. of 
SMFD, ASCE, 99:SM7:541-557. 
Kirkptrick, W. M.  and Khan, A. J., 1984.  The Reaction of Clays to Sampling Stress Relief. 
Geotechnique, Vol. 34, No.1.  
Lambe, T. W. 1969.  Soil testing for engineering. Wiley Eastern limited, New Delhi, India, pp.  
74-75, 81, 83. 
Oades, J.M. (1989) An Introduction to Organic Matter in Mineral Soils, Chap. 3. In: J. B. Dixon 
and S. B.. Weed (EDS.), Minerals in Soil Environment, 2nd edition, SSSABS,1, Madison, WI. 
Rafizul, I. M., Alamgir, M. and Bashar,  M. A. (2010). Characterization and Verification of 
Engineering Properties of Organic Soil with the Emphasis on Reconstituted Soil. Proceedings 
of the Bangladesh Geotechnical Conference 2010, 4-5 November, 2010, BGS-2010, Hotel 
Sheraton, Dhaka, Bangladesh, pp.109-115. 
Rafizul, I. M., Alamgir, M. and Bashar, M. A. (2009). Strength and Compaction Properties of 
Reconstituted Organic Soils of a Selected Site in Khulna Region. Procs. of the Bangladesh 
Geotechnical Conference, BGS 2009, December 17, 2009, BGS-2009, Dept. of CE, BUET, 
Dhaka, Bangladesh, pp.109-115. 
Rafizul, I. M.,  Alamgir M. and  Bashar, M. A. (2006).  Compressibility Properties of 
Reconstituted  Organic Soils at Khulna Region of Bangladesh. 4th International Conf. on Soft 
Soil Engg. (ICSSE), Oct. 4-6, 2006, Vancouver, Balkema, Canada, pp.367-372. 
Rakmi Abd. Rahman and  M.A. Mannan (1995). Effects of Organic Load on Basic Geotechnical 
Properties of Compacted Sand-kaolinite Mixture. PertanikaJ. Sci. & Technol. 3(1):87-
98(1995), ISSl : 0128-7680, © Universiti Pertanian Malaysia Pres. 
Singh, A., 1992. The  Determination of Swelling Pressure of Expansive Organic Clays. I.I.P. 
Board, New Delhi. 
Soon, T.T. and K. K. Phoon, 2003. Preface, In: Proc. of specialty workshop on Characterization and Engg. 
Properties of Natural Soils, pp: IX-X, National University of Singapore, Singapore. 
1187 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
PLANNING AND OPTIMIZING THE ROUTE FOR COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL OF 
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE AT KHULNA CITY USING GIS 
 
 
Md. Rafizul Islam1, Saiful Azim2, Md. Risvi Kizer1 and Muhammed Alamgir1 
 
 
ABSTRACT: Khulna is the third largest metropolitan city of Bangladesh and well-known as an 
industrial city. Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) is the useless and discarded materials considering 
the place produced mainly by daily activities. With the rapid growth of population, amount of 
MSW is also increasing in Khulna city. So, it is necessary to ensure effective collection and 
disposal of MSW and route of collection and disposal is a very important factor here. This study 
focuses to develop an optimized route plans having minimum travel distance regarding to 
accessibility of road for collection and disposal of MSW from secondary disposal site (SDS) to 
ultimate disposal site (UDS) in this city using GIS. The present study reveals that there is no 
systematic time and route plan for the storage, collection and disposal of MSW from SDS to UDS. 
There are more than 40 SDSs are available from where Khulna City Corporation (KCC) vehicles 
are collected the MSW and approximately 26 Haul Containers (HCs) and 1200 community bins, 
located on roadsides throughout the city. To investigate the present situation of SDSs and the 
existing collection and disposal route network, questionnaire and interview survey has been 
conducted and the feedback was recorded. Moreover, transportation facilities, types of vehicles 
were investigated and finally the Lat-Lon of SDSs, KCC garage and UDS were recorded using 
GPS to point out the locations. After collecting all the required information, optimized route 
plans were developed in GIS using ArcGIS through network Analyst tool. 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Khulna is the third largest metropolitan city of Bangladesh and well-known as an industrial city. 
It is located in the southwestern part near the Sundarbans, the largest mangrove forest of the 
world (Alamgir et al. 2005; Rafizul et al. 2009) shown in Figure 1. It is situated below the tropic 
of cancer, around intersection of latitude 22.49º north and longitude 89.34º east (KCC 2009). 
Total area of KCC is 47.0 sq. km. comprising 31 wards (BBS, 2001). Surrounding districts are 
Satkhira at west, Bagerhat at east, Narail at north and Jessore at noth-west, and the Sundarbans, 
then the Bay of Bengal at its south. It lies along the Bhairab River. The city stands on the bank of 
Rupsha River and has an important river port. It is connected by river, road and rail to the major 
cities of the southern Gangetic delta. It is a linear city extending from southeast to northeast along 
the Bhairab-Rupsha River, major highway and railway. The spontaneous nature of city growth 
                                                        
1Department of Civil Engineering, Khulna University of Engineering & Technology (KUET) Khulna-9203 
Bangladesh, imrafizul@yahoo.com; risvi.kizer@gmail.com and alamgir63dr@yahoo.com 
2Assistant Urban Planner, DDC limited, Bangladesh, Khulna, Bangladesh, symon0626@gmail.com 
1188 
 
and its shape are greatly influenced by the rivers Bhairab-Rupsha and Khulna-Dhaka highway. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1 Location of Khulna city as study area 
 
MSW collections in Khulna city are mainly done by Non-government organization (NGOs) and 
community based organization (CBOs) by the supervision of KCC (Ahsan et al. 2005). Door-to-
door collection systems are adopted for MSW collection from generation sources and then 
disposed major portion of it to the nearest SDS. From there KCC vehicles collect the MSW and 
transport it to the UDS. Some NGOs transfer their collected organic wastes like clinical wastes to 
composting plant. Whilst city authority has some limited numbers of non-motorized Rickshaw 
Vans and Hand trolley those are mainly used for the collection of MSW from community bins 
located at roadside, home side, near market and transfer to SDS. Besides this drain sludge’s are 
also collected by this van. It is necessary for the KCC vehicles to have optimized collection and 
disposal route plan to ensure effectiveness in MSW disposal. To these attempts, To investigate the 
present situation of SDSs and the existing collection and disposal route network questionnaire 
and interview survey was conducted and the feedback was recorded and transportation facilities, 
types of vehicles were investigated and finally the Lat-Lon of SDSs, KCC garage and UDS were 
recorded using GPS. After collecting all the required information, optimized route plans were 
developed in GIS using ArcGIS through network Analyst tool. 
 
 
2. Present Scenario of MSW Management in Khulna City 
 
In Khulna city, KCC generally manages the MSW and recently, some NGOs, CBOs and private 
organization are working for door-to-door collection with KCC (Rafizrul et al. 2009). Door-to-
door collection systems are introduced recently for MSW collection from generation sources, 
mainly from households, and then dispose major portion of it to the nearest SDS (Alamgir et al. 
2005; Akter et al. 2008). KCC collects these MSW and transfer it to the UDS but it is a very 
complicated one for the management of MSW. Due to severe financial constraints, lack of route 
1189 
 
networking, lack of motivation, absence of effective legislation to protect the environment, lack 
of commitment of authority, the MSW has becoming a threat for city dwellers, planners and other 
concerned stakeholders (WasteSafe 2005). The management tiers of MSW can be categorized and 
hence discussed in followings. 
 
2.1. Primary Collection 
 
In Khulna city, MSW are collected from generation sources by NGOs, CBOs and KCC by door-
to-door collection systems, and most of the cases owner by himself disposes it to the nearest 
community bins/SDS/open land/road sides/drains (Ahsan et al. 2005). Whilst city authority has 
some limited numbers of non-motorized rickshaw vans and hand trolley those are mainly used for 
the collection of MSW from community bins and transfer to SDS. 
 
2.2. On-site Storage 
 
On-site storage is the SDS and transfer station which receives MSW from primary source and 
transfer to the designated location for processing/recycling/treatment/ultimate disposal (Jahan et 
al. 2011). SDS is considered as the facilities where large amount of MSW are accumulated and 
finally transferred to the desired sites by large vehicles such as open or closed trucks, 
demountable haul container truck, etc (Tinmaz et al. 2005; Apaydin et al. 2007). The SDS are 
located in the selected places based on population, space availability, accessibility and other local 
factors such as desire of influential city dwellers or public representatives (Akter et al. 2005). The 
wide variety of types and shapes of community bins are built by the civic bodies and/or KCC, 
which are located on the roadsides at frequent intervals. MSW from community bins are 
transferred to SDS mostly by city authorities through non-motorized Rickshaw van and hand 
trolley. Figure 2 is showing the present scenarios of SDS for MSW in Khulna city. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2 Present scenarios of SDS in Khulna City 
1190 
 
2.3. Secondary Collection and Transportation 
 
The functional element of collection includes not only the gathering of MSW and recyclable but 
also the transportation after collection, to the location where the collection vehicle is emptied 
(Chowdhury et al. 2008). Only respective city authority is responsible for collecting MSW from 
SDS and transported it by motorized vehicles/trucks and finally disposed in the designated UDS. 
Although NGOs and CBOs collect MSW from households/ generation points and dump it to the 
SDS, they do not take responsibility for the collection & transportation of MSW, which they 
deposited in the nearby SDS (Ahsan et al. 2005). Conservancy department of KCC setup the 
time-schedule and types of vehicle for collection and transportation of MSW. Generally, 
collection vehicles such as dump truck, normal truck, open truck, tractor with trolley, tipping 
truck (container carrier), de-sledging vacuum tanker with tractor, power tiller with trolley stands 
in the road nearest to the SDS for operation. Typical collection methods from SDS and MSW 
heaped transport vehicles. But there is no designed optimized route network for this collection 
and transportation from SDS to UDS. 
 
 
3. Optimizing Routes for Collection and Disposal of MSW 
 
3.1. Geographical Information System (GIS) Approach 
 
GIS is a system which can make both spatial and aspatial analysis of the situation along with a 
future trend and simulation. GIS is very helpful for any types of decision making in planning. In 
case of MSW, GIS can make MSW generation map of different areas, existing MSW collection 
and disposal pattern from SDS to UDS, employment distribution in different wards and existing 
route plan of MSW lifting (Ghosh et al. 2005; Thanh et al. 2009). From these layers the analysis 
can be achieved to derive the logistics and spatial simulation, decision making and planning 
(Ogra, 2003). There are many suggestions in this spatial planning proposal which are said to be 
considered while working on optimizing route of MSW in GIS and they are (i) identification of 
exact location of MSW bins with GPS demarcating on the base map; (ii) maintaining a record of 
SDSs; (iii) a map showing the road network in different areas; (iv) a map showing the distances 
between the bins; (v) location of the SDSs; (vi) record of available vehicles and equipment for 
MSW management; (vii) allocating a unique number to all the SDSs so it can be easily and 
quickly located in case of any complaint registered or planning and maintenance; (viii) 
maintaining a record about the type of SDSs and (ix) record of the responsibilities and 
assignment of work, equipments, vehicles etc. of the MSW maintenance and also the logistics 
information about the transportation involved in the system.  
 
3.2. Khulna City Area Map 
 
The Khulna city area base maps are GIS based Digital map collected from KCC, Khulna. Usually 
KCC has an original record copy from which the base map was developed. The detailed map of 
case study area had the geo-referenced layers of the city boundary, detailed road network, and 
other necessary information. Later these layers were adjoined together in ArcMap. The detailed 
map of the city area was then updated by digitized various new features to make the vector form 
and to enrich the collected base map. Different updated information was spatially located on the 
maps in point, line and polygon features. With this relevant attributes are updated in the attribute 
1191 
 
tables of the vector data. The detailed updated base map of city area with vector data attributes is 
seen in Figure 3. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3 Detailed geo-referenced base map of Khulna city with vector data attribute 
 
3.3. Attributes of Spatial Data for GIS 
 
Spatial data of GIS need attributes information for analysis. GIS data is also use to store 
information about an area and about its various large and smaller components. Here KCC has a 
lot of SDS which are necessary of the GIS analysis. For each one of the SDS, the municipality 
will also store attribute information such as the name and type of disposal sites. When using 
shape files, the data can be presented in 3 different forms: points, lines and polygons. In this study, 
the SDSs were fed as points. 
   Additional attribute data can be added to the database by joining a table which contains the 
new attributes to an existing table already in the GIS. To join these tables together a common 
field must be present. Most GIS can then use the resulting table to display the new attributes 
linked to the entities.  
   Here for the SDSs which is the main required data and which prepared by GPS survey from 
the field, name, type and the category of SDSs are considered as the attribute into the table of the 
vector data file. Beside this data, other vector data file as like roads have various built-in 
attributes like name, length, width, etc. Some of this data are updated. Figure 4 represents the 
sample of attributes on ArcGIS. Here the attribute data of SDSs are shown. 
 
 
1192 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4 Attribute data on ArcGIS 
 
3.4. Optimal Routing using Network Analyst 
 
Network analysis is a widely used technique of ArcGIS useful for route optimization. There is a 
tool name Network Analyst in ArcGIS for this purpose. Two example network analysis 
techniques would be the allocation of values to select functions within the network to determine 
zones, and the determination of shortest path between connected points or nodes within the 
network based on attribute values (Sengtianthr et al. 2004; Upasna et al. 2003). Network Analyst 
can discover the obvious way to get from one location to another or the best way to visit several 
locations. The locations can be specified interactively by placing points on the screen, simply by 
entering an address, or by using points in an existing feature class or feature layer. The very best 
route can be determined for the order associated with locations as specified by the user. 
Alternatively, ArcGIS Network Analyst can determine the best sequence to visit the locations 
(Ramasamy et al. 2003; Vijay et al. 2005). Whether finding a simple route between two locations 
or one that visits several locations, people usually try to take the best route. Hence, the best route 
can be defined as the route that has the lowest impedance, where the impedance is chosen by the 
user. Hence, in this study, some conditions were place into consideration for route optimization of 
1193 
 
(i) starting point from KCC garage, collect MSW from SDS(s) and stops at UDS; (ii) optimum 
travel distance; (iii) least road requirement for vehicle movement; (iv) specific vehicle for 
specific type and category of SDS and (v) using these criteria, optimized routes are defined in 
network analyst tool of ArcGIS. 
   Here, it is interesting to note that the optimized route using network analyst of ArcGIS of 
SDS at KMCH to UDS as presented in Figure 5. On the other hand, the optimized route of SDS 
at Khualishpur Sakha Office, Sibbari moor, Goalkhali and Doulatpur, Goalkhali Navy colony, 
and Banorgati to UDS as the sample output from the ArcGIS is presented in Figures 6 to 10, 
respectively. Moreover the information about the optimized route of SDS at different study area 
to UDS is also presented in Table 1. 
 
Table 1 Optimized route for SDS to UDS with vehicle recommendation in Khulna city 
 
SDS location Type Route length (m) Vehicle (truck) to 
be assigned 
Khulna Medical College Hospital HC-2 11507 Double HC 
Khulna Sadar Hospital HC-2 9132 Normal 
Khulna Zilla School HC-2 10454 Double HC 
Nirala HC-2 8217 Double HC 
Khalishpur Sakha office Open 15460 Normal 
Inside Navy Camp HC-2 13458 Double HC 
Rupsha CSS HC-1 12381 Single HC 
Sibbari Moor HC-1 8823 Single HC 
Goalkhali Navy Colony HC-1 17126 Single HC 
Goalpara Electricity Plant HC-1 18737 Single HC 
Banorgati HC-1 7791 Normal 
Polli Mongol Madrasha HC-1 7892 Normal 
Hotel Millennium HC-1 9110 Normal 
PTI Moor HC-1 9262 Single HC 
KDA New Market HC-1 9796 Single HC 
Shipyard HC-1 14840 Single HC 
Hotel Kadar HC-1 8026 Normal 
Rail Station HC-1 9063 Normal 
Rupsha Bus-stand Moor Open 12160 Normal 
Near Islam Commissioner's House Open 7791 Normal 
Tutpara Open 11692 Small 
Boyra area (Bazar Area + Police Line) Open 13801 Normal 
Sonadanga Kacha Bazar+Dada Store) Open 10188 Normal 
Goalkhali + Doulatpur Open 21288 Normal 
Khalishpur + Customs office Open 17467 Normal 
Khan Jahan road + Shaheber Kobor 
Khana  
Open 8145 Normal 
 
 
 
1194 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5 Optimized route of SDS at KMCH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6 Optimized route of SDS at Khualishpur Sakha office 
 
1195 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7 Optimized route of SDS at Sibbari Moor 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8 Optimized route of SDS at Goalkhali & Doulatpur 
 
1196 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9 Optimized route of SDS at Goalkhali Navy Colony 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10 Optimized route of SDS at KDA New Market 
 
1197 
 
4. Conclusions 
 
In this study it was intended to identify the optimized collection and disposal route of MSW from 
SDS to UDS in Khulna city. There are different routes for the three categories of SDSs and four 
types of MSW collection vehicles. These statistics were given to have the idea of the new MSW 
management system by using the proposed route network. It can be a good decision support tool 
for MSW transport, fuel consumption, work distribution amongst the vehicles for load balance 
and generation work schedules for both employees and vehicles. But KCC should follow these 
routes and should support these routes by necessary manpower and equipments. They should 
maintain the optimized routed to ensure effective collection and disposal of solid wastes. 
Furthermore, they should consider the arrangement of some backup support which will help to 
ensure continuous collection and disposal in emergency through the optimized routes.   
 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
Authors are very grateful and like to express thanks to all the persons who helped in this study by 
giving data and information. 
 
 
References 
 
Akter, J., Alamgir, M., and Rafizul, I.M. (2008). Practical Application of WasteSafe Proposal in a 
Selected Location of Khulna City.National Seminar on Solid Waste Management. Dept of CE, 
KUET, Bangladesh. pp.13-24. 
Alamgir, M., Ahsan, A., McDonald C.P.,Upreti, B.N. and Rafizul, I.M. (2005). Present Status of 
Municipal Solid Waste in Bangladesh. Waste-The Social Context, Alberta, Canada. (16):1-10. 
Apaydin, O. ( 2007). Route Optimization for Solid Waste Collection: Trabzon (Turkey) Case 
Study. Global NEST Journal. 9 (1): 6-11. 
A. Ahsan, M. Alamgir, I.M. Rafizul and K.H. Chowdhury, Initiatives of Nongovernmental 
Organization in SWM at Khulna City. Proc. 3rd Annual Paper Meet and Int. Conference on 
Civil Engg., IEB, Dhaka, Bangladesh (2005), pp.185-195.  
BBS (2001). Population Census 2001. Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics, Preliminary Report, 
Statistical Division, Ministry of Planning, GoB, Dhaka, Bangladesh. 
Chowdhury, K.H., Rafizul, I.M., Akter, J. and Alamgir, M. (2008). Present Status of MSWM in 
BCC. National Seminar on SWM, Dept. of Civil Engg., KUET, Bangladesh. pp. 95-102. 
Ghosh, M.K., Dikshit, A.K. and Sharma, S.K. (1998). A GIS based transportation model for 
MSW disposal-A case study on Asansol municipality. In: Science Direct. 
Jahan, I., Alamgir, M., Khadiza, B. and Salim, M.A.K. (2011) Sitting and Design of Transfer 
Station in Khulna city of Bangladesh. Thirteenth International Waste Management and 
Landfill Symposium S.Margherita di Pula, Cagliari, Italy by CISA. Environmental Sanitary 
Engineering Centre, Italy. 
KCC (Khulna City Corporation). (2009).Solid Waste Management of Khulna City, Khulna City 
Corporation. Khulna, Bangladesh. 
Ogra, A. (2003).Logistic Management and Spatial Planning for Solid Waste Management 
Systems using Geographical Information System. In: Map Asia. 
Rafizul, I.M., Alamgir, M., Howlader, M.K., Kraft, E.  and Haedrich, G., Construction and 
1198 
 
Evaluation of Sanitary Landfill Lysimeter in Bangladesh. (2009). Int. Conference on SWM, 
Technical, Environment and Socio-Economical Contexts. Dept. of CE, KUET, Khulna, 
Bangladesh. pp.475-484. 
Ramasamy, S.M., Kumanan, C.J. and Palanivel, K. (2003). GIS Based Solutions for Waste 
Disposals. In: GIS Development, India 
Sengtianthr, V. and Lao, P.D.R. (2004). Solid waste Management in Urban Areas of Vientiane 
Capita City Using GIS. In: 30th WEDC International Conference, Vientiane. 
Thanh, N.P. (2009). GIS application for estimating the current status and improvement on 
municipal solid waste collection and transport system: Case study at Can Tho city, Vietnam. 
Asian Journal on Energy and Environment. 
Tinmaz, E. and Demir, I. (2005). Research on solid waste management systems: To improve 
existing situation in Corlu Town of Turkey. In: Science Direct. 
Upasna, S. and Natwat, M. S. (2003). Selection of potential waste disposing sites around Ranchi 
Urban Complex using Remote Sensing and GIS techniques. In: Map India. 
Vijay, R., Gupta, A., Kalamdhad, A.S., Devotta, S. (2005). Estimation and allocation of solid 
waste to bin through geographical information systems. In: ISWA. 
WasteSafe. (2005). Integrated Management and Safe Disposal of MSW in LDACs. A recent 
feasibility study under the Asia Pro Eco Programme of EC, Dept. of CE, KUET. 
 
1199 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
GENERATION OF GREEN ELECTRICITY BY ELECTROLYSIS PROCESS 
 
 
Abu Yousuf1, Ahmed nazmus sakib1, Sreejon Das1 and Salma Akhter Iqbal1 
 
 
ABSTRACT: This study evaluated the potentiality of sustainable power production from 
organic-acid-rich biomass by electro-chemical process. Biochemical processes at the cell 
molecular level are intimately associated with the transfer of electric charge.A non-delicious 
fruit, tamarind (Tamarindus indica) was selected as biomass to generate electrolyte. It was 
suspended in fresh water at a ratio of 2:5 containing tartaric- (3-10 %), acetic-, citric-, formic-, 
malic-, and succinic acid. For the preservation of the electrolyte, two types of preservatives, 
phenol and formaldehyde were used separately with 2% by volume and found no significance 
difference. Voltage drop and internal resistance were reduced with the increase of surface area of 
electrodes and current was generated at same rate. But when the volumetric flow rate of 
electrolyte was increased, generation of current also increased rapidly with respect to stagnant 
solution. Internal resistance was also trim downed by flow agitation. By this process, maximum 
power generation was obtained 45.60 mW from tamarind fruit (pH 3-3.5) taking the electrolyte 
volume of 8L. 
 
Keywords: Biomass, electrolysis, organic acids, green electricity 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Electricity is the major source of power for country's most of the economic activities. 
Bangladesh's installed electric generation capacity was 4.7 GW in 2009; only three-fourth of 
which is considered to be available. Only 40% of the population has access to electricity with a 
per capita availability of 154 kWh per annum (Uddin et al., 2006). Overall, the country's 
generation plants have been unable to meet system demand over the past decade. 
   In generating and distributing electricity, the failure to adequately manage the load leads to 
extensive load shedding which results in severe disruption in the industrial production and other 
economic activities.  
   Energy/electricity accessibility is also threatened in rural, remote and coastal areas by extreme 
climatic events. In 2002, about 26% of the total population had access to electricity and 
electricity consumption was only 96 kWh per capita for all sectors (GNESD, 2004). Electricity 
                                                
1Department of  Chemical Engineering and Polymer Science, Shahjalal University of Science and 
Technology, Sylhet-3114, Bangladesh. ayousufcep@yahoo.com, nazmus.sakib1988@gmail.com,  sreejon-
cep@sust.edu, siqbal-cep@sust.edu 
 
1200 
 
access was limited to only about 30% of total households and only 4% households had access to 
the natural gas network nationwide (Sarkar et al., 2003). However, the demand in electricity has 
increased at an alarming rate in recent years in Bangladesh. This rapid increase in electricity 
consumption is due to high growth trends in economic development and population growth (2% 
in 2003) and partially due to the revolution in communications technology (World development 
indicator, 2005). 
   Green electricity is termed that has been generated from renewable resources with minimal 
adverse environmental effects. Thus, it reduces the human health and environmental risks while 
continuing to provide all of the associated benefits. Although the exact definition of green 
electricity may vary by jurisdiction, it is generally defined as being generated from renewable 
resources such as wind, solar and photovoltaic energy, and low-impact hydro resources, low-
emission geothermal, low-emission sustainably produced biomass, or biogas. In this study, we 
called it green electricity, because to establish this technology requires huge tree plantation 
means green. Moreover, by this technology, no net addition of CO2 taken place to the 
atmosphere. In the present study tamarind fruit have been used as source of electrolyte to inspect 
electricity generation in the bio-fuel cells.  
 
 
2. Materials and Methods 
 
2.1. Processing of biomass 
 
Tamarind fruit was collected from the village and local market. Fruits were washed by fresh 
water to remove dust from the surface. Then fruits were cut into pieces, blended into juice and 
filtrated with clean filter cloth. The juice was preserved from microbiological affect by formalin 
as it was found effective compared to other preservative. Availability of the preservative was also 
considered. The pH, conductivity and viscosity of the fresh juice were also measured. Obtained 
juice was placed into Refrigerator. 
  
   
Figure 1 A. Tamarind fruits   B. Tamarind mixed water 
 
 
2.2. Preservation of bio-electrolyte 
 
Several preservatives were tested as antimicrobial agent like sulfuric acid, benzoic acid, ascorbic 
acid, phenol and formaldehyde. Phenol and formaldehyde were mixed at different percentages 
1201 
 
with the sap. Both of these preservatives were taken at a 1%, 2% and 5% for tamarind fruit juice. 
Finally 2% formaldehyde was used for the experiment containing 8000 ml electrolyte.  
 
2.3. Cell design 
 
Empty battery boxes were collected from the local market. The boxes were rectangular with size 
of 8 cm height, 5 cm long and 2 cm width. After washing that boxes, electrodes of copper and 
zinc having dimension of 13.5cm in length and 5 cm in width were inserted within the tamarind 
mixed water. Effective length of electrode in this system was 9.5 cm and 5 cm for width. So the 
effective area of each electrode was 9.5×5×2= 95 cm2. A single box with the arrangement of 
electrodes was shown in Figure 2. 
 
    
Figure 2: Single Cell box  
 
2.4. Measurement of pH 
 
The pH of sap was measured with manual pH meter supplied from laboratory (pHs-25). In case 
of preservative selection, pH was measured by mixing tamarind juice with different percentage of 
phenol and formalin and then respectively pH reading was taken. 
 
2.5. Measurement of emf, volt, current, internal resistance, conductivity and viscosity  
 
First of all E.M.F. was measured by multimeter in open circuit. Then voltage was measured by 
using 1000Ω resistance in parallel connection. The current was measured by Multi meter using 
1000Ω resistance in series. Both conductivity and viscosity were measured by a conductivity 
meter (HI-8033) and a manual viscometer respectively.  
              
Table 1: Units of different parameters 
 
Parameters Units 
emf volt (V) 
Resistance Ohm ( Ω) 
Current mili-ampere (mA) 
1202 
 
Conductivity Siemens (S) 
Viscosity Poiseuille (P) 
  
 
  
2.6. Agitation insertion 
 
Agitation was performed by circulation of electrolyte through cell boxes using potential energy 
difference as shown in Figure 3. Design material, stair was made with wood collected from local 
furniture shop. A diaphragm pump (TAIFU water pump) was used for organic solvent handling 
and pipe for electrolyte circulation and those were supplied from laboratory. Cell design was 
included with wire connection of series combination. A regulator was connected through 
Diaphragm pump to control flow rate of electrolyte, and a 12 DCV LED bulb was also connected 
in series.  A separate container was also used at the end of fourth box of the cell. From the last 
box of the cell, electrolyte flowed to this container where electrolyte was stirred.  Along with 
this agitation system, the electrolyte was flown to the first box of the cell through the diaphragm 
pump.  
 
 
Figure 3 Drawing of structure for agitation of electrolyte through cell boxes. 
 
3. Results and Discussions 
 
3.1. Electrolyte analysis 
 
Selection of electrolyte for commercial production of electricity with suitable cell design was the 
main purpose of this study. Any kind of fruit or leaf juice can be used, if there is evidence of 
significant percentage of acids present with suitable pKa value. There is also some waste from 
food industries that are organic acidic rich and also can be used as an electrolyte for power 
generation. First, the pH value showed the result either extracted juice was suitable for producing 
1203 
 
sufficient voltage difference in a cell or not.  It was found that lower value of pH gave higher 
voltage differences. The pH, pKa and flow rate values were most important factor in case of 
voltage difference and amount of current production.  
 
               Table 2 Properties of electrolytes at initial condition 
 
 
Composition of the feasible fruit or leaf juice is another most important parameter need to be 
considered. It has an important impact on electric resistance on cell when it has been used as 
electrolyte. There are some acid which have higher pKa value, advert high dissociation in 
aqueous solution means high reactive affinity to metal (electrode). Presence of some components 
resists proton transport through electrolyte causing internal resistance in electrolyte. Some acid 
which react with anode to produce complex salt of used metal anode forming a black and white 
layer on the inserted surface of anode. Conductivity and viscosity are another important 
parameter for electrolyte. Highly active electrolyte results lower voltage drop and current 
generation. Moreover, highly viscous electrolyte is hard to have a smooth flow rate. Viscosity and 
conductivity of tamarind fruit mixed water was 145 (N.s.m-2) and 4.77S respectively.  
 
3.2. Electrolyte preservation 
 
Electrolyte solution was affected by microbial attack when no preservative was added.  It was 
found to be spread up of bad smell from contaminated juice.  
 
 
Figure 4 Effect of formaldehyde on preservation of bio-electrolyte 
A several attempt were searched for suitable anti-bacterial chemicals to preserve juice for a long 
time. Phenol and formaldehyde had been found more effective and finally formaldehyde was 
selected due to its availability, price and effectiveness.  
Juice as electrolyte 
With no additives 
Averrrhoa 
Carambola 
Kalanchoe 
Pinnata 
Citrus 
Limonium 
Tamarindus 
indica 
pH 2.2 4.1 2.1 3.0 
Viscosity (N.s.m-2). 132 100.2 266.4 145.8 
Conductivity (S or Ω- ) 4.1 3.08 2.28 4.77 
1204 
 
The Figure 4 showed the anti-microbial effect of formaldehyde on preservation of bio-electrolyte. 
Considering the affect of different concentration of the preservative, 2% formaldehyde was more 
favorable. 
 
3.3. Voltage, current and power calculation 
 
Current density is a measure of the density of flow of a conserved charge. Usually the charge is 
the electric charge, in which case the associated current density is the electric current per unit 
area of cross section, but the term current density can also be applied to other conserved 
quantities. The current density (A/m2) was calculated by the following equation (1) 
Current density, j = I/ A                                       (1) 
Here, I = current and A= projected cross sectional area of anode 
Power density means the voltage difference (V) between two points of a resistor connected with 
the anode and cathode and it was recorded using a precise multimeter. Power density (mW/m2) 
was calculated according to the following equation (2). 
Power density, P= IV/A                                       (2) 
Where, I= current, V=voltage difference and A = projected cross sectional area of the anode 
For electro-chemical cell,   E = (r+R) × I     So, internal resistance, r = E/I – R 
             Energy = power × t = VIt                         (3) 
             Where, power, P= VI                            (4) 
Legends, 
I = Current flow; V = Voltage; E = Electromotive force; R = Resistor connected with cell; A= 
Electrode area; r = Internal resistance of electrolyte;  
To show the power effect of simple electric cell with tamarind four battery boxes with two 
compartments were taken, where each compartment was filled up with electrolyte as earlier 
described in cell design.  
 
 
 
Figure 5 Effectiveness of four cells in series with tamarind as electrolyte  
The electrodes inserted in the compartments were connected in series. To measure voltage Voc 
and short circuit current Isc, a 1000 KΩ resistance was connected in parallel and series 
1205 
 
respectively. 
   The performance of the anode, cathode and electrolyte were analyzed by P-J curves (Figure 
5). The voltages and potentials in an open circuit (J=A/m2) indicated the maximum voltage or 
potential which was feasible under the existing experimental conditions. After connecting the 
resistor, thus allowing an electrical current through the system, it could be observed to what 
extent this maximum voltage or potential was reached. Operation at the higher power densities 
will mean operation at higher cell voltages or higher cell efficiency. 
 
3.4. Effect of electrode surface area on voltage and current fluctuation 
 
To show the effect of surface area, an empty battery box was taken with four compartments. 
Number of inserted electrodes was gradually increased. The effect of electrode surface area on 
voltage drop, current flow and electro-motive force were measured for a certain passage of time. 
The ultimate emf was not influenced by varying the surface area but the internal resistance was 
decreased by increasing the surface area of electrodes. The surface area was increased by 
increasing the number of electrodes in same volume of electrolyte through parallel connection. 
One, two, three and four pairs of electrodes were inserted into the compartments respectively. 
The electrolyte used there was tamarind mixed water at 1:4 ratios. The connection of electrodes 
in each compartment is shown in Figure 2. 
 
 
 
Figure 6 Effect of surface area for single pair electrode with tamarind as electrolyte  
 
The Figure 6 shows the change of voltage with respect to current for single pair electrode. 
Relatively high fluctuation was observed in this experiment. Figure 7 shows the change of 
voltage with respect to current for double pair electrodes. It is straighter then the previous one 
without some initial fluctuation. An initial medium type fluctuation is observed with double pair 
electrode. Figure 8 shows the change of voltage with respect to current for three pair of electrodes. 
It was almost a straight line. Very slight fluctuation was observed. From the above, it seems a 
very slight effect of electrode surface area on voltage and current generation. 
 
1206 
 
 
 
Figure 7 Effect of surface area for double pair electrode with tamarind as electrolyte  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8 Effect of surface area for three pair electrode with tamarind as electrolyte  
 
3.5. Effect of electrode area on internal resistance 
 
The major problem of an electro-chemical cell is the gradual increase of internal resistance within 
electrolyte. The resistance of electrolyte resulted a regular voltage drop between electrodes with 
time. So electrolyte resistance plays an important role of electrolyte selection. The higher the 
conductivity results higher the cell performance. That is why the electrolyte resistance was 
observed precisely. An external resistance of 1000Ω was connected in parallel for voltage 
measurement and another of same magnitude in series for current measurement. 
 
The Figure 9 shows that internal resistance was initially relatively high for double pair electrode 
and having a fluctuation after some time. The three pair of electrode internal resistance was 
increased almost constantly with regular fluctuation with time. Even though the initial change of 
resistance of single pair was slow, but very soon it increases with time. It was satisfactory for 
double pair electrode because the increase of resistance here is in very slow rate. So it stands that  
1207 
 
 
 
Figure 9 Change of internal resistance for different surface area of electrode with tamarind 
electrolyte  
 
 
 
Figure 10 Effect of agitation on voltage for star fruit juice as electrolyte 
 
for the less surface area due to slow reaction rate internal resistance of single pair was high. On 
the other hand due to more surface area internal resistance of double pair increased at almost 
constant rate. 
 
3.6. Agitation effect 
 
Most noticeable effect was observed while agitation. Manual agitation showed significant 
increase in voltage and current. Agitation minimizes the fluctuation of voltage and current. The 
effect of agitation was observed during the experiment with star fruit. At a same interval the 
voltage was taken with agitation and without agitation. The change due to agitation is shown in 
Figure 10. Voltage was higher when the system was agitated. Since the electrolyte contained 
several unwanted compounds, organic acid might be precipitated in stagnant condition.  
 
 
1208 
 
4. Conclusion 
 
It can be concluded that applying this technology, small to medium scale bio-mass based 
electricity generation plant would be established for supplying electricity economically and 
sustainably to rural and remote areas in Bangladesh. The process can also be considered for waste 
from food industry to reduce the wastage and minimize environmental pollution. Electrification 
with this technology of villages in remote areas usually lead to low investment and less power 
losses associated with transmission and distribution network. This will accelerate the recovery of 
power crisis and achieve the desired goal.   
 
Acknowledgements 
 
The authors acknowledge the financial support provided by the University Grand Commissio
n (UGC) through the Shahjalal University of Science & Technology Sylhet-3114, Banglades
h. 
 
 
References 
 
GNESD, (2004), Institutional Reforms and Their Impact on Rural Electrification: Case Studies in 
South and South East Asia, Global Network on Energy for Sustainable Development, 
Roskilde. (http://www.gnesd.org/publications.htm) 
Sarkar, M.A.R., Ehsan, M., and Islam, M.A., (2003), Issues relating to energy conservation and 
renewable energy in Bangladesh, Energy for Sustainable Development, pp. 77-87. 
Uddin, N.S.K. and Taplin, R., (2006), A Sustainable Energy Future in Bangladesh: Current 
Situation and Need for Effective Strategies, The 2nd Joint International Conference on 
“Sustainable Energy and Environment (SEE 2006)” F-007, Bangkok, Thailand, pp. 21-23. 
World Develpment Indicator, (2005), The World Bank, Washington DC, ISBN 0-8213-6071-X, pp. 
306. 
 
1209 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
COMPARATIVE STUDY OF USE OF STONE, BAMBOO, RATTAN, WOOD AS 
COURSE AGGREGATE IN CONCRETE 
 
 
H.M.A.Mahzuz 1, Mushtaq Ahmed2 , Moon Moon Dhar3 and Sumaiya4 
 
 
ABSTRACT: The study focuses on the relative comparison in the use of stone, bamboo, wood 
and rattan as course aggregate in concrete. Three mixing ratios (1:2:2, 1:2:2 and 1:2:4) having the 
same water to cement ratio (0.485) were considered in this research. Full study was conducted by 
Ordinary Portland Cement and sand of a constant FM.  The maximum size of any coarse 
aggregate was kept below 0.75 inch. Curing of all samples was done for 28 days and crushing 
was performed after 56 days. Within this time both the absorption and evaporation of water were 
measured. Finally they were crushed to identify their strength. The Stress-strain curves were also 
gathered from these tests. Finally it is observed that though the compressive strength of bamboo, 
wood and rattan samples were less than that of stone sample yet they offer considerable amount 
of strength that may be suitable for low cost housing. Also as the weight of concrete was by the 
use of these bio-aggregates therefore as a light weight concrete those materials may do a great 
rule than stone.    
 
Keyword: Compression, Stress, Strain, Water absorption, Water-cement ratio. 
. 
1. Introduction 
 
Concrete as a construction material is accepted all over the world because it is comparatively 
economical, easy to make, offers continuity and solidity, and have the ability to bond other 
materials. The main objective of the study is the relative comparison in the use of stone, bamboo, 
wood and rattan as course aggregate in concrete. Three mixing ratios (1:2:2, 1:2:2 and 1:2:4) 
having the same water to cement ratio (0.485).the relative performance of the concrete made by 
normal crushed stone and rattan, bamboo & wood  in the same way the test is performed using 
Sylhet sand as a fine aggregate. This study compare the stone concrete with Rattan, wood, 
Bamboo concrete as an alternative course  aggregate in concrete manufacturing as a building 
materials.  
                                                        
1Assistant Professor, Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, SUST, Sylhet, Bangladesh. 
mahzuz_211@yahoo.com 
2Professor, Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, SUST, Sylhet, Bangladesh. mushtaq_cee
@yahoo.com 
3 Research students of Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, SUST, Sylhet, Bangladesh. 
moon.moon.sust@gmail.com 
4 Reseacrh student of CEE Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, SUST, Sylhet, 
Bangladesh. 
Su_sunam@yahoo.com 
1210 
 
wooden house and timber frame building was found from very old, but in this study wood, bamboo, 
rattan is used as course aggregate in concrete and compare with stone concrete to find alternative 
course aggregate materials. 
 
2. Previous Work 
 
Previously in CEE Department a research work was conducted relating with the compressive 
strength of bamboo which was filled by mortar and concrete of different mixing ratio (Mahzuz, 
Ashrafuzzaman 2010). Another research work was done by using wood; rattan and bamboo saw 
waste with sand in mortar and concrete (Mahzuz, Ahmed, Hossain, and Islam 2011).  Several 
research works is conducted on the basis of alternative fine aggregate and Admixture. A research 
conducted (Villalobos-2005) on Evaluation, testing and comparison between crushed 
manufactured sand and natural sand focuses the physical characteristics and properties ( moisture 
content, FM, Bulk specific gravity, absorption capacity, Bulk density, percentage of voids and particle 
shape) of natural sands (ns) and manufactured sands (ms). Bamboo reinforced concrete performance 
evaluation shows that it is very effective low cost materials and alternative materials also (Francis E. 
Brink and Paul J. Rush 1966).  
Generally wooden house and timber frame building was found from very old, but in this study wood, 
bamboo, rattan is used as course aggregate in concrete and compare with stone concrete to find 
alternative course aggregate materials. 
 
3. Objective 
 
Normally only stone is used for coarse aggregate. In Bangladesh both of heavy structure and 
small structure stone is used as coarse aggregate. If some other material is used as coarse 
aggregate then following advantage can be achieved. 
The objectives of the Study may be like this: 
 To compare the unit weight of concretes where stone, rattan, wood and bamboo 
are used as coarse aggregate.  
 To compare the strength of concretes where stone, rattan, wood and bamboo are 
used as coarse aggregate.  
 
4. Methodology 
 
Three different mixing ratios (1:2:2, 1:2:3 and 1:2:4) are used in this study having the same 
water-cement (w/c) ratio (0.485). The fineness modulus (FM) of fine aggregate was kept constant 
as well. Stone, bamboo, rattan, wood were used as coarse aggregate in concrete (Table: 01). 
Bamboo (Bambusa balcooa), rattan (Daemonorops jenkinsiana), wood (Acacia auricoliformis) 
samples were collected from at least three year old trees.  
 
Table 01 Physical Properties of Coarse Aggregate 
 
Name Stone Rattan  Wood Bamboo 
Type Broken 
stone 
 Local Sunamgonj 
(Daemonorops jenkinsiana 
Ekashia 
(Acacia 
auricoliformis) 
Barak 
(Bambusa 
balcooa), 
1211 
 
Size ½”- ¾”   ½” – ¾” ½” – ¾” ½”- ¾” 
Condition  Air dry Air dry  Air dry Air dry 
Unit weight 
(lb/cft) 
100 23.5 30 28.5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 01 Methodological steps of study 
                     
Table 02 Methodologies for Concrete Test 
 
Ratio 
No 
Water Cement 
Ratio 
Mixing 
Ratio 
Fine 
Aggregate 
Coarse 
Aggregate 
Test 
duration 
Stone (S) 
Bamboo (BB) 
1 0.485 1:2:2 Sand of a  
fixed FM 
Rattan (R) 
56 days 
 
1212 
 
Wood (W) 
Stone (S) 
Bamboo (BB) 
Rattan (R) 2 1:2:3 
Wood (W) 
Stone (S) 
Bamboo (BB) 
Rattan (R) 3 1:2:4 
Wood (W) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1213 
 
 
 
5. Result and Discussion 
 
The course aggregate is the only variable and the fineness modulus is calculated for sand only.  
For course aggregate unit weight, void ratio and water absorption was tested. Portland cement 
was used and water cement ratio was 0.485, which was constant for all ratios. All of materials 
were used as weight basis calculation.  
   For all specimen compressive test, strain test, weight calculation, water absorption test were 
done. Crushing value was determined and kind of failure was also observed.  Compressive test 
was done after 56days and specimens are cured for 28 days. Weight was calculated after 24hr of 
specimen preparation to until 56days. Hammer test were also done before compressive test of all 
specimens. All test results were comparing in same graph and data sheet. 
Fineness Modulus of Normal Sand= 2.78 
 
5.1 Water Absorption of Aggregate: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 02 Water absorption (%) of aggregate vs. time 
 
From figure it has been shown that water absorption of Stone aggregate is very 0-3% and it is 
lowest then other four. Other three sample wood, rattan, bamboo’s water absorption has been 
raising until 26-28day, after that it falls down. From that figure rattan gives higher value, peak 
value is above 90%. And another two bamboos & wood were almost 80% and 70% respectively. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1214 
 
5.2 Water Absorption of Concrete Sample 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 03 Water absorption (%)  vs time ratio 1:2:2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig 04: Water absorption (%)  vs time                 Fig 05: water absorption (%)  vs time 
 
From above graph, water absorption of all specimens, was also increased 0-28day then, 
decreased. Bamboo was provide as well as highest value and stone was lowest. Highest value was 
more than 12% and  water absorption of all specimen remain constant after 47days.From above 
three results and graph it is clear that bamboo concrete absorb highest percentage of water then 
wood, then rattan at last stone. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
1215 
 
Table 03: Weight of sample at 28 day 
 
Materials 1:2:2 1:2:4 1:2:4 Average 
weight 
Stone 13.613 13.689 13.829 13.7103 
Rattan 9.758 9.155 8.997 9.3033 
Wood 9.599 9.441 8.938 9.326 
Bamboo 9.872 9.391 9.156 9.473 
 
Weight of stone sample was more than 13.5 kg but other materials sample was less than 9.5kg. 
Average weight of rattan sample was 32.14% less then stone and 31.97% & 30.9 % less than 
stone weight for wood and bamboo respectively. 
 
 
5.3 Compressive Strength of Concrete   
 
Data from Universal Testing Machine(UTM)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 05 compressive strength (Mpa) 
 
From figure compressive stress of stone concrete was much higher than others. But from another three 
specimen value of rattan was higher than bamboo and wood concrete. And value of wood and rattan 
almost same value. For ratio 1:2:2 all specimen value is higher than other ratio individually.  Rattan 
compressive stress value was 18.5% of stone, bamboo and wood concrete compressive stress value 
were almost 11%.  
 
 
 
 
 
1216 
 
Strain at crushing stress is given below: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 06 Strain at crushing stress 
 
5.4 Hammer Test Data 
 
Figure 07 Compressive Strength (Mpa) from hammer test. 
 
5.5 Failure Analysis: 
Causes of Failure of different samples are shown in following table and types of failure are 
determined by visual observation: 
 
 
 
1217 
 
Table 04: failure type observation 
 
Sample name Figure Type of failure 
Stone 
 
Aggregate failure 
Rattan 
 
Mortar failure 
(very low bonding between 
aggregate and mortar) 
Wood 
 
Mortar failure 
(very low bonding between 
aggregate and mortar) 
Bamboo 
 
Mortar failure 
(very low bonding between 
aggregate and mortar) 
 
 
6. Conclusion 
 
This study focuses the relative performance of concrete by crushed stone concrete with bamboo 
concrete, rattan concrete & wood concrete. This performance evaluated by compressive strength, 
strain, water absorption, weight compares.From laboratory study, it is found that strength of 
Rattan, Bamboo and Wood concrete was less then stone concrete. Rattan concrete strength was 
about 19% of stone concrete, Bamboo concrete and wood concrete was 14% of stone. Weight of 
specimen was reduced more than 30% for bamboo, rattan, wood concrete than stone concrete. 
1218 
 
Water absorption of stone concrete was less than other three samples. Water absorption 
continuously increased to 28day then decreased, after 47 day water reduction was remaining 
constant. Overall load of structure may be decreased by using bamboo, rattan and wood. But 
compressive strength of concrete was reduced by using these alternative materials. Bamboo, 
rattan & wood are biodegradable materials so special precaution should be taken to prevent 
biodegradation, which may decrease strength of concrete. 
 
 
References 
 
Aziz, M.A., 1995. Engineering Materials. Z and Z Computer and Printers, Dhaka, Bangladesh. 
http://www.allinterview.com/showanswers/ 56133.html 
Brink, F.E and Rush, P.J., 1966, Bamboo reinforced concrete construction. 
Mahzuz, H.M.A., Ahmed, M., Ashrafuzzaman, M., Karim, R., and Ahmed, R., 2010                                                                             
Performance evaluation of bamboo with mortar and concrete”, Journal of Engineering and 
Technology Research Vol. 3(12), pp. 342 - 350, November 2011. 
Hossain, M.M., Islam, M.M., 2011”Evaluation of Strength of  Mortar Using Wood, Rattan and 
Bamboo Saw Waste With Sand” B.Sc  Engineering Thesis, Civil and Environmental      
Engineering Department, Shahjalal University of Science and Technology, Sylhet. 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Concrete 
Portland Cement Association, http://www.cement.org/masonry/compressive_strength.asp 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1219 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF WATER QUALITY STATUS OF BURIGANGA RIVER 
 
 
M. A. Zafar1, A. A. Masrur Ahmed2 and A. Rahman3 
 
 
ABSTRACT: The paper deals with the present scenario of surface water quality and comparison 
with the past scenario of water quality of the River Buriganga. Besides, this study will also 
observe the seasonal fluctuation of water quality parameters of the river. From the study it is 
found that, maximum Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD5) occurs at Hazaribagh in the 
Buriganga River during January, February and June in 2009. Maximum BOD5 observed in the 
year of 2007 was 60 mg/l which is about 21 times greater than the BOD5 of the year 1990. On the 
other hand, the pH value was found, varies from 6.17 to 7.85. Effluent Treatment Plants (ETP) is 
urgently needed to tenderize the concentration of industrial pollutants, supposed to be disposed to 
the Buriganga River. 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Dhaka city, the nerve center of all activities in Bangladesh, is very rich in both ground and 
surface water resources having an inherent problem of surface water pollution. The water bodies 
located in the periphery of the city comprise ample water even in the dry season. But domestic 
and industrial wastes generated in the city are deteriorating the water bodies gradually and even 
are jeopardizing their sustainability. In developing countries like Bangladesh, rapid expansion of 
population and industry can increase the loads to wastewater treatment plants (WWTP) and can 
cause deteriorating surface water quality (Campos and von Sperling, 1996; Kamal et al., 1999; 
Drolc and Koncan, 1999; Stamou et al., 1999; Tsagarakis et al., 2001; and Karakoc et al., 2003). 
Pollution in the surface water of Bangladesh is principally due to uncontrolled disposal of 
untreated industrial and domestic wastes. The River Buriganga running by the side of the Dhaka 
City, the capital of Bangladesh, is one of the most polluted rivers in Bangladesh. Many industries 
have set up in and around the Dhaka city during the last decade, and the number of new industries 
are continually increasing. The river Buriganga is increasingly being polluted with the city’s 
thousands of industrial units and sewerage lines dumping huge volumes of toxic wastes which 
contain lots of heavy metal into it day and night (Islam et al., 2006). The population density is 
extremely high in around the city areas. Of the chemical pollutants, heavy metal being non-
biodegradable, they can be concentrated along the food chain, producing their toxic effect at 
                                                        
1Lecturer, Department of Civil Engineering, Leading University, Sylhet-3100, Bangladesh  
zafor_env@yahoo.com  
2Senior Lecturer, Department of Civil Engineering, Leading University, Sylhet- 3100, Bangladesh 
 aa_masrurahmed@yahoo.com  
3Lecturer, Department of Civil Engineering, Stamford University, Dhaka, Bangladesh 
ceeabdur09@gmail.com 
1220 
 
points after far removed from the source of pollution (Tilzer and Khondker, 1993). Saha and 
Hussain (2011) found the concentrations in the total sediments are as follows: 60.3-105.6 mg/kg 
for Pb, 0.4-1.6 mg/kg for Cd, 52.8-139.6 mg/kg for Cr, 70-346 mg/kg for Cu and 245-984.9 
mg/kg dry weights for Zn and fine portion of sediments contain higher heavy metal concentration 
compared to total sediments (Saha and Hussain 2011). Consequently, a huge amount of liquid 
waste - industrial and domestic - finds their easy way to the nearby water courses e.g. the river 
Buriganga near Dhaka city. Thus, the Buriganga River stands out among these rivers with having 
the worst problems in terms of pollution and encroachment. The overall objective of this study is 
to assess the present scenario of surface water quality and comparison with the past situation of 
water quality of Buriganga. Besides, this study will help to observe the seasonal fluctuation of 
water quality parameters of the river and will also help to take the necessary steps for sustaining 
proper surface water quality of the river Buriganga.  
 
 
2. The Study Area 
 
Dhaka city, the study area, lies within the north central region of Bangladesh. The area is 
enclosed by the Tongi Khal on the north, the DND embankment on the south, the Balu river on the 
east, and the Turag and Buriganga rivers on the west. The local surface water hydrology around 
Dhaka is complex. The Buriganga is a tributary of the Dhaleswari river which empties into the 
Meghna. It originated from the Dhaleshwari near Kalatia. This river is only 27 km long. The 
Turag, a small river demarcating the western boundary of Dhaka falls into the Buriganga just 
north of the main urban area near Kamrangirchar. The upstream of the Buriganga, above 
the confluence of the Turag, was formerly a branch of the Dhaleswari and contributed 
substantially to the flow in the Buriganga. However, in recent times this portion of the river has 
silted up. During the lean flow period, the discharge of the Turag along with the local runoff is 
the main sources of water into the Buriganga. In the dry season, with tidal effect, the net flow is very 
low or nonexistent (SWMC, 1996). This low flow rates of the Buriganga during the dry season 
implies that there is little dilution capacity in the Buriganga during this period causing serious 
degradation in quality of water as described in the subsequent sections. The downstream junction 
with the Dhaleshwari fluctuates from time to time according to changes in the position of the latter 
river; at present it lies about 3.22 km southwest of Fatullah.  
 
 
3. Methodology 
 
The water samples were collected from nine different locations of the Buriganga River (table 1) 
shown in figure 1. The portable pH meter HI 8014 by HANNA Instruments was used to test pH. 
For Turbidity testing, Microprocessor Turbidity Meter HI 93703 by HANNA Instruments was 
used. PO4, NO3 were tested using HACH UV Spectrophotometer DR/ 4000U. Suspended Solids, 
Dissolved Solids, Dissolved Oxygen, BOD5 were tested by Standard Methods developed by 
APHA, AWWA, WPCF (1998). For this study, field observation was needed to know about the 
existing physical and environmental condition of the study area. The secondary data, map and 
information have been collected from BUET, DOE, IWM, and BWDB to compare them with the 
present tested data. 
1221 
 
Table 1 Water quality measurement locations 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1 Water Quality Measurement Stations 
Station River 
Mirpur Bridge Turag 
Hazaribag Buriganga 
Kamranair Char Buriganga 
Chandighat Buriganga 
Sadarghat Buriganga 
Farashganj Buriganga 
Dholai Khal Buriganga 
Bangladesh China Bridge Buriganga 
Pagla Buriganga 
1222 
 
4. Analysis of water quality  
 
In this investigation, surface water quality data around Dhaka city were collected from various 
sources for analysis and to investigate the trend of degradation of water quality. The degradation 
and seasonal fluctuation of important water quality parameters are analyzed and presented 
graphically.  
 
4.1. Dissolved Oxygen (DO) 
 
One of the most important parameters frequently considered in river pollution studies is 
Dissolved Oxygen. This parameter has been analyzed to find out the trend of degradation of DO 
around the year from 1968 to 2008. The critical concentration of DO is 4 mg/l, which must be 
maintained for healthy aquatic lives in the water. Historical trend of DO has been tried to evaluate 
in spite of insufficient data. From this research work, it is observed that generally Dissolved 
Oxygen concentration remains low in January, February, March, and April (dry season). Figure 2 
shows the Dissolved oxygen Yearly variation of DO in the Buriganga River from 1968 to 2008. A 
complete diurnal variation is not conceived since DO had been measured only from 9:00 am to 
4:00 pm in most of the campaigns. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2 Yearly variation of DO in the Buriganga River from 1968 to 2008 
 
However, figure 3 shows the monthly variation of DO in the Buriganga River in the year 2009. It 
is seen that the DO level is very low at the first four months of the year. These four months- 
January, February, March and April markes the driest period of the year. At this time the flow of 
water in the river is very low and concentration of pollutants is very high. In addition, figure 4  
and figure 5 show the variation of DO from the upstream to downstream of Buriganga River in 
the year 2002 and 2008 accordingly.  
 
1223 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3 Monthly variation of DO in the Buriganga River in the year 2009 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4 Variation of DO from the upstream to downstream of Buriganga Riverin the year 2002 
 
1224 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5 Variation of DO from the upstream to downstream of Buriganga River (2008) 
 
 
4.2. Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) 
 
Measured biochemical oxygen demand (BOD5 at 20°C) in the river system varies from 5 mg/1 to 
20 mg/l (figure 6). During the dry season the BOD5 has been found very low (3 to 4 mg/l) 
whereas in the wet season BOD5 were observed as the highest. In this study the highest BOD5 
was found for Dholaikhal in April, 2009 and lowest for Dholaikhal in June 2009.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6 Monthly variation of BOD5 in the Buriganga River in the year 2009 
 
 
1225 
 
4.3. Ammonia 
 
High ammonia-nitrogen concentration (around 10 mg/1) is observed at Kamrangirchar and 
Keraniganj on the Buriganga River which is shown in figure 7. Maximum NH3-N concentration 
in the river system is more than the allowable limit USEPA guideline (0.02 mg/1) and ECR, 1997 
guideline (0.5 mg/l) to avoid toxic effect for fishes. Table 2 shows some of the secondary data at 
various points of Bhuriganga.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7 Variation of NH3-N in different places along Buriganga River 
 
Table 2 The NH3-N lavel in different month and year 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.4. Turbidity 
 
The monthly variation of Turbidity of Buriganga River in the year 2009 varies from 5 to 40 NTU. 
Figure 8 shows the highest turbidity found for the month September at dholaikhal point. It is also 
observed that the turbidity is lowest at the wet season and usually remains high in flood period. 
Turbidity data procured- by IWM from DOE shows significant variation between that of 2000 
and 2002 (Table 3).  
 
 
Month/year Pagla Keranigang 
 
Kamrangir 
Char 
Fatulla Hazaribagh 
 
Apr-03 0.31 0.25 0.19 0.23 - 
Dec-03 0.017 0.048 0.029 0.017 0.21 
Mar-04 0.19 0.28 0.36 0.08 0.33 
Apr-04 0.55 8.36 10.68 0.44 - 
1226 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8 Monthly variation of Turbidity in the Buriganga River in the year 2009 
 
 
Table 3 the monthly variation of turbidity in the Buriganga during 2000 to 2002 
 
 
Turbidity in various loacations 
 China Bridge 
Buriganga 
Chandnighat Dholaikhal 
 
Hazaribagh Kamrangir 
Char 
Mont
h/Ye
ar 2
00
0 
20
01
 
20
02
 
20
00
 
20
01
 
20
02
 
20
00
 
20
01
 
20
02
 
20
00
 
20
01
 
20
02
 
20
00
 
20
01
 
20
02
 
Jan 30 30 4.5 30 30 6.5 35 35 8 38 38 6 28 28 4.5 
Feb 28 26 4.9 32 28 10 35 30 10 38 27 6.5 30 30 6 
Mar 30 12 6 30 9.7 8 38 16 8.
5 
34 9.8 9 30 9.6 7 
Apr 30 10 10 30 12 10.
5 
32 12 12 38 10 12 32 10.
5 
10 
May 30 12 6.5 32 9.7 8 38 16 9.
5 
42 9.8 9.5 30 9.6 7.5 
Jun 28 12 10 28 9 12 38 12.
5 
12 36 12 12 30 10 10 
Jul 10
0 
16.
5 
12.
5 
67 15 10 85 18 12 47 14 12 68 16 10 
Aug 50 12 10 65 10 105 11
0 
10 15 50 12 12 60 6 10.
5 
Sep 29 12 10 32 12 10 34 11 15 32 12 12.
5 
30 8 10.
5 
1227 
 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Pagla
Kamrangichar
Dhulaikhal
3rd Buriganga Bridge
Sadar Ghat
Hazari bagh
Chadni Ghat
Oct 28 5 9 30 40 8.5 30 6 12 30 4.5 10 32 3.5 8 
Nov 28 6.5 6 28 6 6 32 6 10 36 6.5 8.5 30 6 6 
Dec 25 30 4.5 25 30 6.5 25 35 8 25 38 6 25 28 4.5 
 
 
 
4.5. pH Value 
 
The pH value of the Buriganga River found as quite close in different locations which are cited in 
figure 9. In the beginning of the year, little fluctuations observed, later on it follows a plane 
trends.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9 the pH value of the different location in the year 2009 
 
 
5. Conclusion and Recommendation  
 
Buriganga River receives solid wastes, sewage and wastewater, containing biodegradable 
materials and industrial effluent. Thus the water quality is being deteriorated over the years. The 
increase of domestic and industrial pollutant loads can be attributed to the rapid increase of 
population, industries and subsequent increase of people without proper sanitation facilities. Low 
flow of water, lack of rainfall and increase in temperature during dry season also contribute to the 
pollution status of the Buriganga river. In the wet season there is a scope of dilution of pollutant 
loads by high water flow enhanced by rainfall. Dissolved Oxygen (DO) for sustaining aquatic 
lives (4-5 mg/l) does not prevail in any of the selected locations along this river. Dissolved 
Oxygen (DO) reaches to zero in some locations especially at Hazaribagh, Chandnighat and Pagla 
during dry season. It is observed that generally Dissolved Oxygen (DO) concentration remains 
1228 
 
low in January, February, March, and April (dry season). Recent scenario at Hazaribagh is worse 
than the scenario of Chandnighat and Pagla. Maximum Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD5) 
generally occurs at Hazaribagh in the Buriganga river during January. February, and June in 2009, 
BOD5 varies from 28 mg/l to 60 mg/l at Hazaribagh during January to June. Maximum BOD5 
observed in the year of 2009 was 60 mg/l which is about 21 times greater than the BOD5 of the 
year 1990. It is essential to make provisions for protection and improving water quality of the 
Buriganga River to sustain the ecosystem in this river and overall environment of the Dhaka city. 
Current pollution will be minimized if necessary approaches are properly implemented. 
Hazaribagh tanneries are responsible for causing pollution in the Buriganga River by the 
contribution of toxic and persistent pollutants, for that an Effluent Treatment Plant (ETP) should 
be established without delay. Uproot every kind of pollution making industry including tannery 
from both sides of the Buriganga River. Pagla sewage treatment plant will need to be expanded to 
handle extra pollution load. 
In order to arrange proper and systematic approaches to restore water quality of the Buriganga 
River, the following recommendations should be considered: 
 
 Though the adjacent area of the Buriganga is foreshore/ shore, assurance should be given 
from the ministry of land that the land would not be encroached further. 
 Dhaka bypass road can be implemented along the both side of the river and trees can be 
planted between the bypass and the river. Thus we can increase the total environment of 
old Dhaka and thereby increasing the transportation facilities of the city as well as 
reducing the opportunities for further encroachment. 
 Tannery industries should be shifted from the surrounding of the Buriganga River. 
 Proper laws should be enforced from the Department of Environment to reduce the 
pollution of the river water from adjacent pollution. 
 Uproot every kind of pollution making industry including tannery. 
 Proper treatment plant of sewage needed before sewage disposal in the Buriganga river 
for that every pollution making industry should have effluent treatment plant (ETP). 
 New and old industries must be regulated under pollution control law. 
 Establish a treatment plant at Hazaribagh or shifting of tannery units to provide 
considerable opportunity to properly manage the Buriganga river Water quality. 
 Pagla Sewage Treatment Plant need to be expanded and route the discharge from Dholai 
Khal and city drains to Pagla Sewage Treatment Plant. 
 
 
References 
 
APHA, AWWA, WPCF (1998). Standard Methods for the examination of water and wastewater, 
19th edition. 
BWDB (2004), Buriganga augmentation report Feasibility Report, Volume-l. 
Campos, H. M., von Sperling, M. (1996).Estimation of domestic wastewater characteristics in a 
developing country based on socio-economic variables, Water Sci. Technol. 34(3–4), 71–77. 
Drolc, A., Koncan, J. Z. (1999).Calibration of QUAL2E model for the Sava River (Slovenia)’, 
Water Sci. Technol. 40(10), 111–118. 
Environmental Conservation Rules (ECR 1997) 
IWM (2004). Study to investigate alternate Location of the Intake of Sayedabad Water Treatment 
1229 
 
Plant, Draft Final Report- Institute of Water Modeling,Dhaka Water Supply and Sewerage 
Authority (DWASA). 
Islam, M. M., Haque, M. R, Ahmed, M. K. Mannaf, M. A. (2006)“Seasonal variation of
 heavy metals concentrations in Gudusia chapra inhabiting the Sundarban mangrove for
est” J. NOAMI., 23(1), pp. 1-21, 2006. 
 
Karakoc, G., Erkoc, F. U. and Katiricoglu, H.: 2003, ‘Water quality and impacts of pollution 
sources for Eymir and Mogan Lakes (Turkey)’, Environ. Int. 29(1), 21–27. 
Kamal, M. M., Malmgren-Hansen, A. and Badruzzaman, A. B. M.: 1999, ‘Assessment of 
pollution of the River Buriganga, Bangladesh, using a water quality model’, Water Sci. 
Technol. 40(2), 129–136. 
Saha, P. K, Hossain, M. D, (2011) Assessment of Heavy Metal Contamination and Sediment 
Quality in the Buriganga River, Bangladesh 2011 2nd International Conference on 
Environmental Science and Technology IPCBEE vol.6 (2011) © (2011) IACSIT Press, 
Singapore. 
Stamou, A. I., Koumanova, B., Stoyanov, S., Atanasov, G. and Pipilis, K.: 1999, ‘Water quality 
of the Beli Lom river’, Water Sci. Technol. 39(8), 55–62. 
SWMC (2000). Baseline Information Study of the Dhaka Combined Flood Control cum 
Eastern Bypass Road Project, Surface Water Modeling Centre Final Report, Japan 
International Cooperation Agency (JICA); Volume-1. 
Tsagarakis, K. P., Mara, D. D. and Angelakis, A. N.: 2001, ‘Wastewater management in Greece: 
Experience and lessons for developing countries’, Water Sci. Technol. 44(6), 163–172. 
Tilzer, M. M and Khondker, M (1993) Hypertrophic and polluted freshwater ecosystems: 
Ecological basis for water resource management,”Dept. of Botany, Dhaka University, B
angladesh, 1993. 
 
 
1230 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
AN EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION ON MECHANICAL BEHAVIOR OF MACRO 
SYNTHETIC FIBER REINFORCED CONCRETE 
 
 
Mohammad Jobaer Hasan1, Mahzabin Afroz 2 and H M Iqbal Mahmud3  
 
 
ABSTRACT: Concrete is an indisputable material for the construction of various types of 
structures in the modern advancement of civil infrastructures. Concrete is strong in compression 
but weak in tension and shear. To eliminate those problems, the introduction of fiber was brought 
in as an alternative to developing concrete in view of enhancing its tensile and shears strength as 
well as improving its ductile property. Hence, the purpose of this study was to investigate the 
mechanical behavior of concrete reinforced with macro (structural) synthetic fibers. To determine 
these properties experimental work was carried out. Four batches of concrete were cast: one with 
no fibers and the remaining three with three different volume fractions fibers of 0.33, 0.42 and 
0.51%, respectively. Concrete specimens (cubes, prisms and beams) were cast to determine the 
mechanical behavior such as compressive, tensile and shear strength. Test results showed that 
macro synthetic fiber enhanced the compressive strength insignificantly. However, macro 
synthetic fibers at 0.33, 0.42 and 0.51% volume fractions improved the tensile strength by at least 
10, 15 and 14%, respectively, compared to the control specimen. Similarly the ultimate shear 
strength was increased significantly by at least 15, 45 and 65% for macro synthetic fibers of 0.33, 
0.42 and 0.51% volume fractions, respectively, compared to the control beams. The failure of 
plain concrete specimens was sudden (brittle) for both the tensile and shear strength tests. 
However, the concrete reinforced with macro synthetic fibers showed more ductile behavior 
compared to the plain concrete. Macro synthetic fibers improved the ultimate strain value by at 
least 50, 60 and 60% for macro fibers of 0.33, 0.42 and 0.51% volume fractions, respectively.  
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Concrete and cement based materials have been implemented in structural members since 
prehistoric times. Day by day the significance of concrete has developed and the limitations of 
concrete have been slowly but surely eliminated which increases the durability of concrete 
allowing a higher performance value to be achieved. However, concrete is strong in compression 
but weak in tension. To overcome this weakness in concrete, steel reinforcement is utilized to 
                                                        
1Assistant Professor, Department of Civil Engineering, KUET, Khulna-9203, Bangladesh. 
jobaerce@yahoo.com  
2Lecturer & Post-graduate Student, Department of Civil Engineering, KUET, Khulna-9203, Bangladesh. 
sarlinkuet@gmail.com  
3Assistant Professor, Department of Civil Engineering, KUET, Khulna-9203, Bangladesh.  
iqmahmud304@yahoo.com 
 
 
 
1231 
carry the tensile forces and prevent any cracking or by pre-stressing the concrete so that it 
remains largely in compression under load (Clarke et al., 2007). 
   The introduction of steel fibers was brought in as an alternative to developing concrete in view 
of enhancing its flexural and tensile strengths. Although the basic governing principles between 
conventional reinforcement and fiber systems are identical, there are several characteristic 
variations; such as - fibers are generally short, closely spaced and dispersed throughout a given 
cross section (Kosmatka et al., 2002). However reinforcing bars or wires are placed only where 
required. Moreover steel fibers helps to reduce the problems associated with congestion of shear 
reinforcement such as interference with concrete compaction (Majdzadeh et al., 2006). These 
may attributed to the honeycombing and poor quality of concrete, particularly at critical sections 
such as beam-column junctions.  
   With the development of synthetic fiber, synthetic macro-fiber (fiber’s diameter is larger than 
0.1mm is defined as macro-fiber (CECS 38, 2004)) has been used widely in civil engineering. 
Due to some limitations of steel fiber, macro synthetic fiber could be a better solution for 
enhanced performance, such as- facilitate light weight concrete structure, high corrosion 
resistance; better residual (post-cracking) flexural strength, smaller crack width and improved 
performance in impact, abrasion along with more of a leveled surface than traditional steel fiber 
reinforced concrete. Synthetic macro fiber, such as Strux90/40 is a new type reinforcement 
material in concrete. 
   In this study, mechanical behavior of concrete reinforced with four different percentages of 
macro synthetic fibers (Strux90/40) where plain concrete as a control specimen was investigated. 
In pursuit of this investigation, several laboratory works were performed – for instance, casting 
and testing of – (i) cubes for compression and tension. (ii) beams for shear and (iii) prisms for the 
determination of stress-strain relationships and finally (iv) making comparison and discussion on 
the test results. 
 
1. Experimental Program 
 
1.1 Material 
 
The main component of the polymeric fiber used in this study was polypropylene as shown in 
Figure 1. This synthetic macro fiber’s nominal length was 40 mm and had an aspect ratio of 90 
and a specific gravity of approximately 0.92. The fiber had a rectangular cross-section with 
average width of 1.4 mm and average thickness of 0.11 mm. The average tensile strength of the 
fiber was 620 MPa with a modulus of elasticity of 9500 MPa.  
 
                                              
 
Figure 1 Macro synthetic fiber 
 
 
1232 
 
Ordinary Portland Cement (OPC) was used as a binding material. The fine aggregate with a 
maximum size of approximately 2 mm was used in the experimental work. The coarse aggregate 
used in this concrete mixture was gravel with a nominal maximum size of 10 mm. Concrete was 
cast with a water-cement ratio (w/c) of 0.42 throughout the work. 
 
1.2 Mixing Propertions 
 
The concrete mix ratio was 1:2:3:0.42 (cement: fine aggregate: coarse aggregate: w/c ratio). 
Table1 shows the detail of mixes which were used in concrete casting. 
 
Table 1 Details of concrete mixes  
 
Macro 
Synthetic 
Fiber 
Volume 
fractions Cement 
Fine 
Aggregate 
Coarse 
Aggregate Water 
(kg/m3) (%) (kg/m3) (kg/m3) (kg/m3) (kg/m3) 
None 
3 
3.8 
4.6 
Vf = 0% 
Vf =0.33% 
Vf =0.42% 
Vf =0.51% 
376 
376 
376 
376 
752 
752 
752 
752 
1128 
1128 
1128 
1128 
131 
131 
131 
131 
 
 Three types of moulds were used to cast the specimens. The moulds with dimensions of 100 
mm × 100 mm × 500 mm were used for beams, the moulds with dimensions of 100 mm × 100 
mm × 300 mm were used for prisms and the moulds with the dimensions of 100 mm × 100 mm × 
100 mm were used for cubes. Where, cubes were cast to determine the compressive and tensile 
strength, beams were cast to determine the shear strength and prisms were cast to determine the 
stress-strain relationships of the macro synthetic fiber reinforced concrete. Among the four 
batches, six cubes, three beams and three prisms were cast in each batch.  
 A total of 0.10 m3 concrete mixes involving four batches were cast with four different 
quantities of macro synthetic fibers such as 0, 3, 3.8 and 4.6 kg/m3 which corresponds to 0, 0.33, 
0.42 and 0.51% of volume fractions of macro synthetic fibers respectively. Plain concrete 
specimen was used as a reference to compare with all other specimens. Mechanical behavior of 
concrete, for instance, compressive, tensile and shear strength and stress-strain relationships were 
determined after a curing period of 28 days. 
 
1.3 Mixing Sequences 
 
A mixer machine was used to get the standard quality of concrete. In the mixer machine, firstly, 
the coarse aggregate was added followed by the macro fibers. These dry ingredients were mixed 
for about two minutes so that the fibers were evenly distributed throughout the mix. Special care 
was taken so as to ensure no fiber balls were formed which would effect the concrete’s 
consistency (e.g. slump or flow). Then fine aggregate and cement were added into the mixture 
machine. These dry ingredients were mixed for about one minute and then mixed with water. 
Concrete was placed in the moulds in two layers and a vibrator was used to compact properly. 
After finishing the vibrating of the top surface a trowel was used to make the top surface smooth. 
 
 
1233 
The specimens were stored for 24 hrs under a temperature of 150C to 270C to set the concrete. 
After 24 hrs the specimens were demoulded and kept in the water tank for 28 days of curing and 
then the specimens were prepared for testing.  
 
1.4 Instrumentation and Testing 
 
Two types of universal testing machines were used. Compressive strength test procedure was 
carried out in accordance to BSI (2009). An indirect tensile test procedure was carried out in 
accordance to BSI (2009).  
 
 
 
Figure 2 Instrumentation of beam specimen for direct shear test 
 
To determine the material properties in shear, beams 100 × 100 × 500 mm were tested in 
accordance with the Japan Society of Civil Engineers standard test procedure JSCE (1990), with 
some modifications. Figure 2 shows the experimental setup of beam specimen for direct shear 
test. The shear load was applied by a loading block 100 mm apart. The specimen was supported 
on two rigid blocks 300 mm apart. Since the specimen in direct shear contained two shear failure 
planes, the ultimate shear strength of the specimen was calculated.  
The stress-strain relationships of macro synthetic fiber concrete mixes were obtained by testing 
100 mm × 100 mm × 300 mm prisms in uniaxial compression, utilizing a Dertec Servo-Hydraulic 
testing machine which is shown in Figure 3.  
 
 
Figure 3 Load vs. deformation test set up 
This machine can plot automatically a graph, Load vs. Deformation, which made it possible to 
plot stress-strain graph of a specific sample. The loading capacity of this machine was 500 kN. 
 
 
1234 
The experiment was done using this machine with a compressive loading rate of 0.00015 mm/s. 
Two linear variable displacement transducers (LVDT) were used in measuring the strain and 
these were protected by a stiff metal sleeve, so that when the transducers came to the end of their 
travel the anchorage blocks would be dislodged without causing damage to the transducers.  
                        
2. Results and Discussions 
 
2.1 Compressive Strength Test Results 
 
A total of 12 cubes of size 100×100×100 mm with four different percentages of macro synthetic 
fiber volume fractions, such as 0, 0.33, 0.42 and 0.51% were tested. Table 2 shows the 
compressive strength test results and the changes in the compressive strength for each type of 
specimen. 
 
Table 2 Compressive strength test results 
 
Specimen 
ID. Cube Types 
Compressive 
Strength 
(MPa) 
Average 
Strength 
 (MPa) 
Strength 
Increase (%) 
38.74 
39.12 C1 Control Cubes 
38.86 
38.91 - 
40.23 
40.76 C2 0.33% Macro Synthetic Fiber 
40.62 
40.54 4.19 
41.34 
40.85 C3 0.42% Macro Synthetic Fiber 42.10 
41.43 6.48 
41.87 
41.35 C4 0.51% Macro Synthetic Fiber 41.56 
41.59 6.89 
   
 
 
 
Figure 4 Variation of Compressive Strength 
 
 
1235 
Figure 4 shows the changes in average compressive strength relative to the cube types. Test 
results reveal that addition of macro synthetic fiber in concrete enhanced the compressive 
strength of the specimens. It was improved by at least 4% for the specimen C2 and gradual 
improvement was found by at least 6.48 and 6.89% for the specimen C3 and C4, respectively 
with respect to the control cube specimens. Hence, it is a matter of further research to identify the 
optimum percentage of macro synthetic fiber which will yield the maximum compressive 
strength of concrete. 
 
2.2 Tensile Strength Test Results 
 
Table 3 below shows the average indirect tensile strength recorded during the test and the 
percentage changes in tensile strength for all mix batches relative to the control batch. 
Table 3 Tensile strength test results 
 
Specimen 
ID. Cube Types 
Tensile 
Strength 
(MPa) 
Average 
Strength 
(MPa) 
Strength 
Increase (%) 
3.52 
3.76 T1 Control Cubes 
3.38 
3.55 - 
4.07 
3.85 T2 0.33% Macro Synthetic Fiber 3.82 
3.91 10.14 
4.24 
4.12 T3 0.42% Macro Synthetic Fiber 
3.93 
4.10 15.49 
3.97 
4.16 T4 0.51% Macro Synthetic Fiber 4.08 
4.07 14.65 
Figure 5 below shows a graphical representation of the average indirect tensile strength for 
concrete containing no fibers and concrete containing different volume fractions of fibers. 
 
 
Figure 5 Variation of tensile strength 
 
 
1236 
Table 3 and Figure 5 show that the indirect tensile strength was increased with the addition of 
macro synthetic fibers. The tensile strength of the concrete for the cube specimens T2 and T3 was 
increased by at least 10 and 15%, respectively, relative to the sample T1. The maximum tensile 
strength was recorded as 4.10 MPa for the cube with a macro synthetic fiber volume fraction of 
0.42%. This increase in tensile strength was due to the fibre bridging properties in the concrete. 
The reinforced concrete was split apart in the tensile strength test and as a result the load was 
transferred into the fibres as pullout behaviour when the concrete matrix began to crack where it 
exceeded the pre-crack state. The control batch specimens containing no fibres failed suddenly 
once the concrete cracked (Figure 6), while the macro fibre reinforced concrete specimens 
exhibited cracks but did not fully separate (Figure 7). This shows that the macro fibre reinforced 
concrete has the ability to absorb energy in the post-cracking state. 
 
 
  
 
Figure 6 Plain concrete after tensile test 
 
Figure 7 Macro Fibre concrete after test 
 
However, the tensile strength of the cube specimen was decreased for the sample T4 by 0.35 MPa 
compared to the cube specimen T1. The reason for this downward trend in the T4 cube (0.51% 
macro fibre volume cube) may be due to the inadequate concrete’s workability (fibres are known 
to decrease workability) for higher dosages as well as full compaction not being achieved. It can 
be improved by a slight increase of fine aggregate, as this would provide a sufficient paste 
volume for coating the fibres and the addition of super plasticizer to offset the possible reduction 
in the slump, particularly for the mixtures with high fibre content. 
 
2.3 Shear Strength Test Results 
 
Table 4 shows the average shear strength of two identical samples of the beams and percent 
increase in shear strength with three different percentages of macro synthetic fiber volume 
fractions, compared to the reference beams.  
 
Table 4 Shear strength test results 
 
Speci
men 
ID. 
Beam Types 
Shear 
Strength 
(MPa) 
Average Strength 
(MPa) 
Strength 
Increase 
(%) 
3.86 S1 Control Beams 
3.64 
 
3.74 
- 
 
 
 
1237 
3.73  
4.45 
4.14 S2 0.33% Macro Synthetic Fiber 4.36 
 
4.32 
 
15.32 
5.25 
5.57 S3 0.42% Macro Synthetic Fiber 5.46 
 
5.43 
 
44.97 
5.92 
6.43 S4 0.51% Macro Synthetic Fiber 6.19 
 
6.18 
 
65.10 
 
 
 
Figure 8 Variation of shear strength 
 
Figure 8 represents the average shear strength for a plain concrete beams without fibers and the 
concrete beams with three different percentages of macro fiber volume fractions. The results of 
the shear strength test shows that the concrete’s shear strength increased gradually with the 
increase of macro fiber dosages. Shear strength was increased by about 15% for the beam 
specimen S2. However, this was increased significantly by about 45% for the beam sample S3. 
Finally, the shear strength was increased to a maximum value of about 65% for the beam 
specimen S4. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9 Illustration of fibrous beam after direct shear test 
 
 
 
1238 
 
Furthermore, the concrete specimens containing no fibers cracked and failed in a brittle condition 
when it had reached the ultimate strain in the concrete. On the other hand, fiber reinforced 
concrete also cracked at the ultimate strain but it was capable of carrying the load well after the 
crack developed on the concrete which is shown in Figure 9. This indicates that the fiber 
reinforced concrete has the ability (ductility) to hold the beam from falling apart at the position of 
the crack. 
 
2.4 Stress-Strain Relationship Analysis 
 
 
                                                 
 
Figure 10 Average stress-strain curves for prisms with 0, 0.33, 0.42 and 0.51% macro synthetic 
fiber 
 
Figure 10 shows the comparison on the average stress-strain curves for four different types of 
prisms reinforced with four different percentages of macro synthetic fiber volume fractions such 
as 0, 0.33, 0.42 and 0.51%, respectively. 
Fiber reinforced concrete did not enhance the ultimate stress. However, it had improved the peak 
strain value by at least 50, 60 and 60% corresponding to the prisms reinforced with macro 
synthetic fiber volume fractions of 0.33, 0.42 and 0.51%, respectively. This was attributed to the 
fibers’ ability (ductility) to distribute stresses and slow down the crack propagation process. 
 
3. Conclusions 
 
This paper has been concerned with the investigation of some mechanical behavior of concrete 
reinforced with macro synthetic fibers. The experimental studies were done on compressive, 
tensile and shear strength of the FRC. Beside this, stress-strain behavior of FRC was also 
investigated. Hence the conclusions can be summarized as: 
 
 
1239 
 
i)    From this study, it was found that with the addition of fibers the compressive strength was 
increased even if, it was insignificant.  
 
ii) The addition of macro synthetic fibers to concrete also improved the tensile strength 
compared to plain concrete. Moreover, the control batch specimens containing no fibers 
failed suddenly once the concrete cracked, while the macro synthetic fiber reinforced 
concrete specimens were still remain as a unique cubes. This shows that the macro synthetic 
fiber reinforced concrete has the ability to absorb energy in the post-cracking state.  
 
iii) The addition of fibers improved the shear strength of concrete significantly. Shear failure in 
plain concrete beams containing no fibers was brittle. In each of the plain concrete beams 
once the peak load occurred, the beams failed and a post peak load capacity was nonexistent 
as opposed to those with the macro synthetic fiber reinforced beams. This indicates that the 
fiber reinforced concrete has the ability to hold on the crack of the concrete and resist the 
concrete beams from falling apart.  
 
iv) In this study, macro synthetic fibers did not improve significantly, the ultimate stress of the 
specimens. However, the ultimate strain values were improved which suggest increased 
ductility or perhaps increased creep occurring in the macro synthetic fiber reinforced 
concrete. 
   Hence, from this study it can be concluded that the addition of macro (Structural) synthetic 
fibers improved the compressive, tensile and shear strength as well as the ductility of concrete. 
As the concrete is a fundamental material in the field of construction engineering, the 
improvement of its mechanical properties by the addition of this fiber will certainly increase the 
use of this composite material which will offer more strong and durable structures in the future 
and will open a new era in the field of construction materials. 
 
 
References 
 
British  Standards Institution. (2009). “Testing hardened concrete, Part 3: Compressive strength 
of test specimens.” BSI, London, BS EN 12390-3, 5-9. 
British  Standards Institution. (2009). “Testing hardened concrete, Part 6: Tensile splitting 
strength of test specimens.” BSI, London, BS EN 12390-3, 7-9 
Clarke, J., Peaston, C. and Swannell, N. (2007). “Guidance on the use of Macro-synthetic-fiber 
reinforced Concrete”. The Concrete Society, Technical Report No. 65, 1-2. 
CECS  38  (China  Civil  Engineering  Institute  Code)  (2004).  “Technical specification  for  
fiber  reinforced concrete structures.  China Planning Press. 
JSCE-SF6. (1990). “Method of test for shear strength of Steel Fiber Reinforced Concrete 
(SFRC).” Japan Society of Civil Engineers, SF6, 67-69. 
Kosmatka, S., Kerkhoff, B.and Panarese, W. (2002). “Design and Control of Concrete Mixtures”.  
14th Edition, Portland Cement Association, Fibers (ch. 7), 121-126. 
Majdzadeh, F., Soleimani, M. and Banthia, N. (2006). “Shear Strength of Reinforced Concrete 
Beams with a Fiber Concrete Matrix.” Canadian Journal of Civil Engineering, 33(6), 726-
734. 
1240 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
SOIL EROSION AND RUNOFF WITH VARIATION IN RAINFALL INTENSITY, SLOPE 
AND VEGETATION COVER: A CASE STUDY IN KHULNA, BANGLADESH 
 
 
Mahmud M. Minhaz1, Nazmul Huda Chowdhur2, Rahman M. Shariar2, Rashid M. Hasanur2 and 
Hasan M. Kamrul2 
 
 
ABSTRACT: One of the most essential and fundamental resource of our earth is soil, providing 
the medium for plant growth and water retention. Disproportionate and unplanned handling of 
plant, soil, and water for centuries deteriorated natural balances amid these renewable natural 
resources in Bangladesh. In addition to that where arable lands are less than necessary, certainly 
susceptible to severe erosion due to rainfall and flood particularly when poor agricultural 
methods are used or preventive measures are not taken. Soil erosion is considered one of the 
major hazards nowadays not only for agricultural production, but also for the environmental 
challenges related to watershed protection and biodiversity conservation. Substantial amount of 
soil loss become one of the most vital tribulations in Bangladesh, consequently the country is 
suffering from striking effects on soil feature, aquatic being and overall upland environments. In 
this study we investigated the rainfall intensity, runoff and rate of erosion on several model beds 
with the variation of vegetation cover through the year of 2009 at Khulna in Bangladesh. The 
study was conducted on four model beds, whereas each bed with same area but variation in at 
least one of two parameters i.e. slope, and vegetation cover. Principal results were that runoff and 
erosion both are likely to be significantly impacted by rainfall intensity, soil surface slope and 
presence of vegetation cover; as the rainfall intensity increases about 20% both erosion rate and 
runoff increase about 12 and 8% respectively on flat bare bed and about 17 and 11% respectively 
on a 20% slope bare bed. Bare bed with slope possesses highest runoff and erosion rate. While 
flat bed with vegetative cover possesses the least. Furthermore, implementation of vegetation 
cover reduces the soil erosion rate and runoff up to 63 and 40 % comparing with bare beds. In 
conclusion, a common perception is that runoff and erosion are decreased as a function of 
vegetation cover roughness and comparatively flat surface. However soil erosion is likely to be 
more affected than runoff by changes in rainfall intensity and vegetation cover.  
 
Keywords: Soil Protection, Watershed Management, Sustainable Soil Conservation System 
 
                                                        
1Research Associate SHAKKHOR Environment & Education Development Society, Bangladesh.(E-mail-
tomnhz@gmail.com) 
2Department of Civil Engineering, Khulna University of Engineering & Technology (KUET), (E-mail 
nazmul.shuvo32@gmail.com,ceshakil05@gmail.com,cehasan06@yahoo.com,kamrul.hasan2k7@gmail.co
m) 
   
1241 
 
1.  Introduction 
 
Soil constitutes the infrastructure for manufacturing, through the biological process of primary 
production, food, forage, fibre, timber, and biochemical compounds of medicinal, herbal, 
cosmetic and other industrial uses. Yet, soil is a fragile fabric, sensitive to the elements and to 
human impact. These jointly can reduce the soil’s capacity to provide for primary productivity. 
This reduction, which intensifies with the mounting pressure on soils to provide for the needs of 
the burgeoning global human population is termed “land degradation”, and its salient expression 
is soil erosion. 
   Principal global issues of the 21st century are food security and environment quality. Soil 
erosion would linger an imperative global issue for the 21st century because of its adverse impact 
on agronomic productivity, the environment, and its effect on food security and the quality of life 
(Eswaran et al., 2001). Despite the phenomenal advances made in agricultural technology, there 
are several regions of the world where food production has either not kept pace with the increase 
in population or has barely kept ahead of the ever-increasing demand. Although stagnation or 
decline in agricultural production can be due to political and social reasons, degradation of soil 
and water resources and lack of appropriate technology to address the basic issue of resource 
management may be the primary factors responsible for low agricultural productivity. Important 
among environmental issues are poor water quality and the accelerated greenhouse effect. Water 
scarcity and poor water quality are major concerns in numerous countries. 
   Scientists and professionals are sentient about appropriate utilization of soil, and considered 
soil erosion as one of the most severe environmental problems in the earth and ecosystem 
(Govers, G. et. al 1990). Around one third of the world's coastal regions are at soaring jeopardy 
of soil erosion (Caffyn et al., 2002), for the most part from land-based sources of contamination 
and infrastructure development.Prime soil resources of the world are finite, nonrenewable over 
the human time frame, and prone to degradation through misuse and mismanagement. Rapid 
increase in global population, especially in several developing countries due of misuse of the 
natural resources (land, water, vegetation) are mainly related to the population pressure and the 
migration of people from rural areas to the urban i.e. from the upstream to the downstream in an 
intra basin as well as an inter provincial scale. This process leads to the degradation of the prime 
lands adjacent to the settlement areas and the rural areas by abandonment (Cangir et al. 2000; 
Zucca et al. 2006).  Influence of vegetation cover on water infiltration, runoff and erosion has  
been  reported by  numerous investigators including Rauzi(1963).Vegetation cover provides 
incredibly imperative function in reduction of erosion rate in quite a lot of mode such as 
interception, restraint, retardation, infiltration, transpiration etc (Gray and Leiser, 1982). 
Greenway (1987) notes that roots reinforce the soil, increase soil shear strength, reduce 
susceptibility to erosion and extract moisture from soil.Research of soil erosion is difficult for 
several reasons, but particularly because soil erosion is an intermittent process. It is therefore 
extremely difficult to observe the erosion act itself, and so in most cases, only the 
consequences of erosion are investigated.These are eroded soils and erosion forms on the one 
hand, and substances removed from the soil.  In some cases, the process of erosion may also 
be assessed from sediments.  It is generally the case that the greater the time interval which has 
elapsed since the erosion process and the greater the transportation distance of the investigated 
substance from the eroded surface, the lower is the accuracy of interpretation, and the more 
difficult it is to assess the overall influence of erosion.Surface erosion caused  by precipitation  
implies  the destruction  of  soil  by  rain drops and surface runoff in the form of  precipitation 
water flowing down  a  sloping surface.  The problems of soil erosion research are broad and 
1242 
 
varied. Any aspects of the erosion phenomenon may become an object of research, from 
erosion factors to erosion control measures. Considering the impact on agriculture, it is 
obvious that interest focuses on precipitation and more specifically, on those forms of erosion 
that cause the greatest damage to crops. In forestry, attention is concentrated on the control of 
flow and load in catchment areas and on improvements by both biological and technical 
means. 
   Estimation of soil loss and associated sediment yield resulting by runoff is necessary for several 
applied environmental problems.For instance, evaluation of contaminant mobility (Johansen et 
al., 2003), efficacy of land management treatments (Hastings et al., 2003), post-fire hydrology, 
indices of ecosystem health (Davenport et al., 1998) and archeological site stability (Sydoriak et 
al., 2000). The intention of the study was to amplify our understanding of the effect of different 
initial soil surface roughness and rainfall intensity on runoff and sediment yield in a variety of 
stages of runoff generation for the period of comparing the data found from field experiment and 
from the analysis, and optimize vegetation cover as stabilizer for land as well technical feasibility 
study of vegetation cover designed for soil erosion reduction, slope stabilization and bio-mass 
augment; hence providing a sustainable conservation method for land and watershed management 
in Bangladesh. 
 
2. Materials and Method 
 
2.1. Study area 
The study area is Beel Dakatia located in the district of Khulna, southwestern part of Bangladesh 
and falls within the Ganges tidal deltaic plain. It lies between administrative boundaries 
of Dumuria and Phultala upazilas of Khulna district (longitudes 89°20'E and 89°35'E and 
latitudes 22°45'N and 23°00’N). The climate of the area is characterized by sultry summers, 
moderate winters, tropical cyclones, tidal inundation, heavy rainfall and salinity. The average 
annual rainfall during 1965-1990 was about 1,750 mm. (Rahman 1995) 
 
2.2 Plot Preparation 
 
In this study, to evaluate the rainfall susceptibility to cause erosion, termed rainfall erosivity as 
well as its associated sediment concentration and runoff, we measured in several manners.We 
established study plots within the Beel Dakatia in such a way that reflects a variety in the slope 
and vegetation cover.  
 
Table-1: Difference between plots 
 
Plot Vegetation Cover Slope 
P1 Bare 20% 
P2 Bare Flat 
P3 Vegetated 20% 
P4 Vegetated Flat 
 
1243 
 
The studies were conducted during the year of 2009 on four 5.0 X 8.0 m runoff plots. Runoff 
plots numbered (P1-P4) consisted of a set of four sheet metal sediment traps with aperture parallel 
to the slope contour. Every plot was different from each other in such a manner that at least one 
of the two parameters (vegetation cover and slope) is dissimilar as shown in Table-1 
 
2.3. Treatment and Evaluation 
 
We prepared bare plots by removing the grass turfs and rotavating the surface and did maintain in 
a bare condition by regular herbicide treatments. To maintain perfect slope we used level. We 
planted native grass in two plots and nourished them.  
   Moreover, in this study, we investigated the rainfall intensity, runoff, soil moisture contents and 
rate of erosion on several model beds with the variation of slope.We used traps and water stage 
recorder for measurement of soil sediment yield, soil splash height, and runoff volume. Total 
runoff during a rain was channeled through traps fabricated from a 100 L reservoir and 3 mm 
mesh hardware cloth in each plot. We equipped a rain gauge to measure the rainfall. Besides, trap 
to evaluate the erosivity. Each trap consisted of a 30 cm diameter circular tube inserted into the 
soil, containing a similar-sized funnel on top of the reservoir; however, analogous splash traps 
have been used by Poesen and Torri (1988). After collecting the jar we dried the sedimentation 
by oven and weighted them.  
   Additionally, we used  Revised Universal Soil Loss Equation 2 (RUSLE2) (Renard et al, 1997) 
to assess how the rainfall amount and its intensity affects soil erosion for the soil erosion is 
directly proportional to the rainfall erosivity while other factors are kept unchanged (Wischmeier 
and Smith, 1978). 
   
 
Where A = Annual soil loss, R = Rainfall erosivity index, K = Soil erodibility factor, L = Slope  
length, S = Slope steepness, C = Cover management, P = Soil conservation practice factor 
 
 
3. Results and Discussion 
 
In the following, the salient results and their interpretation are presented: 
 
3.1. Precipitation 
 
Rainfall was measured in two ways i.e. by a non-recording rain gauge and a rain gauge. With this 
rain gauge rainfall was measured through the year 2009. Some error occurred during the 
measurement (Table-1).  
   Water erosion occurs when raindrops hit the ground and dislodge soil particles from the soil, 
and then these dislodged soil particles wash away and in the process dislodge and remove further 
soil particles. Rainfall energy depends on total rainfall (Table-3) and rainfall intensity. The 
rainfall energy is the energy which falling raindrops have then impacting with the soil. 
 
 
 
 
1244 
 
Table-2: Percentage error in measured rainfall 
 
   
Table-3: Measured rainfall at Beel Dakatia in year 2009 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.2 Impact of Rainfall Intensity on Runoff and Sediment Deposition 
 
Both runoff and sediment yield significantly varies with changes in rainfall intensity. Table-4 
shows the variation in different intensity. Erosion rate increases with augment of rainfall 
intensity for the reason that drop diameter and rain drop impact both increases. This is found 
by following Busby and Gifford (1981) equation  
 
                            
 
   Where D is the mean drop diameter, and a,b = Two empirical factor (a = 1.238 and b = 0.182) 
 
 
 
 
 
Time(min) 
 
Rainfall Measured 
with Rain gauge 
(cm) 
 
Rainfall Measured 
with measuring 
cylinder 
(cm) 
 
 
 
Error (%) 
 
0.5 0.947 0.96 1.3727 
1.0 1.55 1.58 1.9354 
1.5 2.368 2.373 0.2111 
2.0 3.4 3.47 2.0588 
 
Rainfall 
(mm) 
 
 
Month 
1 January 
5 February 
11 March 
21 April 
133 May 
230 June 
351 July 
571 August 
353 September 
113 October 
21 November 
0 December 
Total=1810  
1245 
 
Table-4: Variation in runoff and erosion rate with rainfall intensity 
 
 
3.2 Significance of Slope 
 
Soil surface slope plays very crucial role in soil erodibility factor, soil erosivity, erosion rate and 
estimating total soil loss. Variation in erosion rate due to slope shown in Table-4. Results 
illustrates that due to 20 % slope, both runoff and erosion rate increase up to 10%. 
 
3.3 Role of Vegetation Cover 
 
Influence of vegetation cover on water infiltration, runoff and erosion has been  reported by  
numerous investigators including  Rauzi(1963).Vegetation cover provides incredibly imperative 
function in reduction of erosion rate in quite a lot of mode such as interception, restraint, 
retardation, infiltration, transpiration etc. Gray and Leiser, (1982) notes that roots reinforce the 
soil, increase soil shear strength, reduce susceptibility to erosion and extract moisture from soil. 
Table-4 illustrates that implementation of vegetation cover reduces the soil erosion rate and 
runoff up to 63 and 40 % comparing with bare beds. Moreover, it conserves water in the root 
zone, thus increase the moisture content and reduce runoff. Hence, reduce the erosion rate. 
Vegetation protects the soil against the  action of  falling raindrops, increases the degree  of  
infiltration  of  water  into the  soil, maintains  the  roughness of  the  soil surface, reduces the 
speed of  surface runoff, binds the soil mechanically, diminishes microclimatic fluctuations  in  
the uppermost layers of  the  soil, and  improves the physical, chemical and biological 
properties of  the soil. Where there are favorable conditions for the formation of a continuous 
vegetation cover, the extent of erosion is well below harmful levels. 
 
3.4 Vegetation Cover, Runoff and Erosion Rate  
Vegetation cover protects the soil from raindrop impact and splash, tends to slow down the 
movement of surface runoff and allows excess surface water to infiltrate. Raindrops hit exposed 
soil with great energy and launch soil particles along with the water into the air. Raindrop 
splash and resulting sheet erosion remove a thin film of soil from the land surface. The impacts 
of both are intensified on sloping land. Erosion rates on sloping lands are exceedingly high. 
Runoff (L/m2/h) Sediment Loss Rate (Kg/m2/h) 
 
 
Intensity 
(mm/h)  
P1 
 
 
P2 
 
P3 
 
P4 
 
P1 
 
P2 
 
P3 
 
P4 
 
40 
 
 
44.8 
 
38 
 
42 
 
31.3 
 
1.3 
 
1.1 
 
0.8 
 
0.5 
 
50 
 
 
50 
 
41.4 
 
44 
 
34 
 
1.7 
 
1.4 
 
0.9 
 
0.8 
 
75 
 
 
58 
 
44.7 
 
50.7 
 
39.5 
 
2.3 
 
1.7 
 
1.3 
 
1.1 
1246 
 
Vegetation improves the resistance of slopes to both surficial erosion and mass wasting. 
Conversely the removal of slope vegetation tends to accelerate slope failures. Vegetation cover 
also modifies the soil microclimate by reducing variations in soil and air temperature and 
moisture content, thereby reducing aggregate breakdown of the soil. 
 
Table-4: Variation in plots due to changes in Slope, Vegetation Cover 
 
3.5 Soil Moisture Response to Soil Conservation Measures 
 
When measures that conserve soil and prevent runoff and its associated erosion are successful, 
the result is increasing soil moisture contents. Therefore, soil moisture is an indirect indication 
of soil conservation and runoff prevention. It is also an indicator of a potential for primary 
productivity and maintenance of biodiversity. Vegetation cover significantly increases 
moisture content (Figure-1) by conserving water in root zone. Moreover, it increases 
infiltration rate drastically. This increased infiltration reduces surface runoff, and the reduced 
surface runoff reduces soil erosion and hence sediment transport and accumulation. 
 
3.6 Sustainable Soil Conservation System for Bangladesh 
At present soil erosion has become a concerning topic among the engineers of Bangladesh. Soil 
erosion has contributed for the environmental disruption by loosing soil from the upstream 
surface to lower downstream like river, canal, and sea. Losing top soil and transportation of soil 
by rainwater has accelerating the risk of river filling by siltation and overtopping of water over 
the river bank. In the month of June-august maximum precipitation occurs. In this time heavy 
rain causes submerge condition to heavy flood. Day by day our overall water level is increasing 
at a high rate and depth of river is decreasing. As a result the river is becoming dry in winter and 
summer season causing a movement to the natural disaster like flood, drought, and land 
scarcities. Besides the runoff of top soil nutrients is lost which is very much essential for plant, 
micro bacteria etc. and thus our farming land is being polluted. So, has become so clear that, soil 
loss is to be controlled. For this proper soil loss management is required.   
 
 
 
Plot 
 
Erosion Value 
Measured in 
the Site 
(g/m2) 
 
Erosion Rate 
Equivalent 
(t/ha/yr) 
 
RSULE2 
Estimated 
Erosion 
Rate 
(t/ha/yr) 
 
Runoff  
(L/m2) 
 
 
Moisture content 
(%) at 20 cm 
Depth in Month 
August 
P1 21050 21 28 79.5 22 
P2 17308 17.3 22 71.9 23 
P3 8255 8.2 11 49.5 29 
P4 7005 7.1 8 43.3 31 
1247 
 
 
Figure 1 Variation in parameters 
 
4.  Conclusion 
 
Much work still needs to be done to clarify the ecological consequences of erosion on the soil, 
the water environment, the atmosphere, and the whole living environment. The reduced 
productivity of ecosystems and the damage caused by erosion need to be better understood, so 
that methods of soil protection can be improved. Protection of the land from the deposition of 
erosion products and from harmful agents which are released into the environment during the 
erosion process brings their own special problems. It may be added in concluding that soil 
erosion phenomena are as complicated as the natural conditions under which they occur, as well 
as  the different types of  land involved. Therefore no theoretical work can provide practical 
solutions to problems of soil erosion under specific conditions, but such a work may help to 
throw light on the basic features of the phenomenon and indicate the general direction of a 
practical solution. It is to be hoped that the intensive research on erosion, which has been come 
out during the last few decades in different parts of the world will provide sufficient information 
to make possible effective and comprehensive protection of the soil, which is one of man’s most 
important resources. The rate of progress is determined by the application of erosion control 
measures in practice, and the success of these measures is the most important criterion for 
judging the value of current theories and planning further development. 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
The author would like to thank Department of Civil Engineering, Khulna University of 
Engineering & Technology for invaluable cooperation. In addition, special thanks to 
SHAKKHOR Environment and Education Society for cordial response. 
1248 
 
References 
 
Busby, R.E., and G.E. Gifford. 1981. Effects of livestock grazing on infiltration and erosion rates   
measured on chained and unchained Pinyon-Juniper sites in southern Utah. J. Range Manage. 
34:400-405 
Caffyn, A., B. Prosser, et al. (2002). “Socio-economic Framework: A framework for Analysis of 
Socio Economic Impacts on Beach Environments” Istituto Agronomico per Oltremare, 
37(50), pp. 167 -184 
Cangir C, Kapur S, Boyraz D, Akc ¸a E, Eswaran H (2000) An Assessment of Land Resource 
Consumption in Relation to Land Degradation Turkey.Journal of Soil and Water 
Conservation. 55: 253–259 
Davenport, D.W.,D.D. Breshears, B.P.Wilcox, and C.D. Allen. 1998.Viewpoint: Sustainability of 
pin ˜ on-juniper ecosystems—Aunifying perspective of soil erosion thresholds. J. Range 
Manage. 51:231–240. 
Eswaran, H., R. Lal and P.F. Reich. (2001): Land degradation: an overview. In: Bridges, E.M., 
I.D. Hannam, L.R. Oldeman, F.W.T. Pening de Vries, S.J. Scherr, and S. Sompatpanit (eds.). 
Responses to Land Degradation.Proc. 2nd.International Conference on Land Degradation and 
Desertification, Khon Kaen, Thailand Oxford Press,New Delhi, India. 
Govers, G. 1990. Empirical relationships on the transporting capacity of overland flow, 
International Association of Hydrological Sciences, Publication 189, 45–63 
Gray,D. H., and A. T. Leiser. 1982. Biotechnical Slope Protection and Erosion Control. Van 
Nostrand Reinhold Company. New York 
Greenway, D. R. 1987. Vegetation and Slope Stability. In Slope Stability, Eedited by M. F. 
Anderson and K. S. Rechareds. Willy and Sons New York 
Hastings, B.K., F.M. Smith, and B.F.Jacobs. 2003. Slash treatment greatly reduces sediment yield 
from a rapidly eroding pin ˜ on-juniper woodland. J. Environ. Qual. 32:1290–1298. 
Johansen, M.P., T.E. Hakonson, F.W. Whicker,and D.D. Breshears.2003. Pulsed redistribution of 
a contaminant following forest fire:Cesium-137 in runoff. J. Environ. Qual. 32:2150–2157 
Poesen, J. & D. Torri 1988. The Effect of Cup Size on Splash Detachment and Transport 
Measurements Part 1: Field Measurements. Catena Supplement 12: 113-126 
Rahman, A. (1995) Beel Dakatia: The Environmental Consequences of a Development Disaster. 
Michigan University Press 
Rauzi, F. 1963. Water intake and plant composition as affected by differential grazing on 
rangeland. J. Soil Water Conserv. 18:114-11 
Renard, K.G., Foster, G.R., Weesies, G.A., McCool, D.K., Yoder, D.C., 1997. Predicting Soil 
Erosion by Water: A guide to conservation planning with the Revised  Universal Soil Loss 
Equation (RUSLE),  Agriculture Handbook 703, USDA-ARS, South West Watershed 
Research Center, Tucson, AZ. 
Sydoriak, C.A., C.D. Allen, and B.F. Jacobs. 2000. Wilderness Ecosystems, Threats, and Man-
agement, Missoula, MT. RMRS-P-15-VOL-5. 23–27 May 1999.USDA Forest Service, Rocky 
Mountain Research Station, Og-den, UT 
Wischmeier, W.H. and Smith, D.D., 1978. Predicting Rainfall Erosion Losses – A Guide to 
Conservation Planning Agricultural Handbook 537, USDA-ARS, South West Watershed 
Research Center, Tucson, AZ. 
Zucca C, Bautista S, Previtali F (2006) Desertification prevention and reversal through 
mitigation and restoration programs. Encyclopedia of Soil Science. Taylor & Francis Group. 
New York. 
1249 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
REINFORCED CONCRETE BUILDING SLAB WITH HOLLOW CONCRETE 
PARTITION BLOCK 
 
 
Engr.Mohiuddin Ahmed1 and Engr.Fatema Ahmed2  
 
 
ABSTRACT: Reinforced Brick Slab and Rib Slab are being used in addition to solid concrete 
slab from age old. For RB Slab Clay brick is used only to reduce the use of concrete so as to 
make work cheaper. Practically since the saving was not substantial it failed to gain acceptance. 
Rib slab is used only when it is architecturally required for fancy work, but it is prohibitably 
costly as it requires too much form work. Steel forms, if made and there is scope for repeated use, 
may find it economical only for longer span—more than 5m/ 16.4 ft.  Hollow Concrete Block is 
of 3 types: Partition block, Ceiling block and Load bearing block. Ceiling block are used 
following the design procedure for Rib slab. Residential buildings’ slabs are mostly small where 
in, use of available size of ceiling block make the slab too deep resulting cost ineffective. 
Partition blocks are thinner in size than Ceiling block. The author designed and built many 
building slabs incorporating partition block. The relative additional benefit of Slab with block 
are—8-19% cost saving, 12-29% reduction of self weight , Cooler room in Summer and warmer 
in Winter,  better sound proof and reduction in deflection.   RC slab with partition block with the 
design methodology is introduced in this paper. Additionally cost economy of Slab with Block 
compared to solid slab is also discussed.  
 
Keywords: Hollow concrete block [HCV], Ceiling block, Partition block, Rib T beam 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
Since the strength of concrete in tension is small and is neglected in design, elimination of much 
of the tension concrete in a slab by use of pan forms/ hollow concrete block results in a saving of 
weight with little change in the structural characteristics of the slab. Solid concrete slab for 
residential building—one way, two way or flat—needs thickness about 100 to 200 mm. 
Compression zone above neutral axis is 35 to 70 mm. Tension zone below neutral axis concrete is 
useless—that is: 65 to 130 mm. Rebar takes dominant role in this zone of concrete load bearing 
member like slab. If, somehow, slab could be casted making void space in the tension zone, slab 
                                                        
1Managing Director of Engineering Planning Consultancy Team, 27/3 Jalalabad AbasikElaka, Sylhet, 
Bangladesh 
2Assistant Engineer of Engineering Planning Consultancy Team, 27/3 Jalalabad AbasikElaka, Sylhet, 
Bangladesh 
1250 
 
could be made lighter resulting cost saving and other pertinent benefit. 
   Standard form of steel pans and Hollow concrete ceiling block are used, but their use is limited 
beyond span—5 m/ 16.4 ft. Standard steel pan, if could be used many times then it will be 
economical, otherwise Hollow Concrete Ceiling Block is used in practice. Design procedure for 
such ribbed slab is discussed by Winter and Mosley in their books. [Ref—1 & 2] 
   HCV manufacturer manufactures ceiling block of thickness— 150mm to 300 mm. For slab of 
longer span (more than 5m/ 16.5ft)  this is found appropriate. In commercial, communal and 
industrial building slab Ceiling block finds its use. In residential building available ceiling block 
does not fit as economic. However, in sophisticated palacial building, smallest size ceiling block 
[150 mm] sometimes finds exceptional use. 
   Partition block thinner than ceiling block [75-140mm] and of similar concrete grade [7 mpa] 
has been catered for use for the design and construction of  residential building slab—one way, 
two way and flat. The author has designed and built many such building slabs—small or big—
and found satisfactory. In this paper the design principle and methodology are introduced. Further 
advantages are discussed.  
 
The comparative advantages of Slab with hollow block over conventional concrete solid are: 
• Cost saving: 15% 
 Weight reduction: 30%. This implicates design of beam, column and foundation positively. 
• Room becomes cooler in summer and warmer in winter. 
• Sound insulation is improved 
• Deflection is also minimized. 
 
Table1. The available sizes that are now manufactured in the market: 
 
Type of Use  with strength Name by size [mm] Size [mm] 
90 390x190x90 
100 390x190x100 
140 390x190x140 
Partition block  [7 mpa] 
 
190 390x190x190 
300 600x200x300 
250 600x200x250 
200 600x200x200 
Ceiling block 
mpa] 
 
150 600x200x150 
140 390x190x140 Load bearing block [15 mpa] 
190 390x190x190 
 
2.  DESIGN PRINCIPLE 
 
Concrete slab is a load bearing member. A simply supported slab causes compression above 
neutral axis and tension below. ‘d’ is denoted as effective depth and ‘kd’ is  denoted compression 
depth/ zone  above neutral axis , as shown in figure below. Concrete in tension below neutral axis 
serves no purpose but providing cover to steel that takes care of tension. If concrete in tension 
zone is voided providing steel cover only, concrete use could be minimized. Rib slab is designed 
1251 
 
on this principle. For Rib slab- form work cost is extra ordinary that discourages its use excepting 
for architectural requirement. If hollow concrete ceiling block is placed below neutral axis hollow 
space could be retained and formwork requirement be avoided. 
 
 
 
Figure 1 Figure 3.8 of page 71 0f Winter [Ref-1] 
 
Winter has described about one way and two way Joist floor system in his book. [Ref—1]. But 
this book has not covered on ‘Slab with hollow concrete block’. Literature review has exposed 
limited use of ribbed floor slab in span below 5m/ 16.5 ft. 
 
4. Brief Design Procedure 
 
Near the supports the hollow blocks are stopped off and the slab is made solid. This is done to 
achieve greater shear strength, and if the slab is supported by a monolithic concrete beam the 
solid section acts as a flange of a T-section. 
 
The thickness adding Concrete flange or topping over block including the block topping should 
not less than 'kd'.  
However the minimum thickness has been specified by Mosley [Ref—2], as below: 
The minimum thickness concrete flange will be: 
 
 30 mm for slabs with permanent blocks which are capable of contributing to the structural 
strength as specified in B.S. 8110, and where there is clear distance between ribs not more 
than 500 mm/ 20 inches. 
 25 mm/ 1 inch when blocks described in (1) are jointed with cement-sand mortar. 
 40mm or one-tenths of the clear distance between ribs, whichever is the greater, for all other 
slabs with permanent blocks. 
 50 mm or one-tenth of the clear distance between ribs, whichever is the greater, for slabs 
without permanent blocks. 
The rib width will be governed by cover, bar spacing and fire resistance. With in-situ 
1252 
 
construction, the ribs should be spaced no further than apart than 1.5 m and their depth below 
the flange should not be greater than four times their width. 
 
The shear stress is calculated as: 
 V=V/bw d 
Where bw  is the breadth of the rib. If hollow blocks are used this breadth may be increased by the 
wall thickness of the block on one side of the rib. When v exceeds vc shear reinforcement is 
required, and v must be less than 0.8 fcu and 5 N/ mm2. Nevertheless shear calculation, in 
practice, is found always o.k. 
 
Span-effective depth ratios are limited to the values for a flanged beam based on the shorter span 
but the web width used may include the thickness of the two adjacent block walls. 
At least 50 percent of the total tensile reinforcement in the span should continue to the supports 
and be anchored. In some instances the slabs are supported by steel beams and are designed as 
simply supported even though the topping may be continuous. Reinforcement should be provided 
over the supports to prevent cracking in these cases. It is recommended that the area of this top 
steel should be less than one quarter of the steel required in the middle of the span and it should 
extend at least 0.15 of the clear span into the adjoining spans. A light reinforcing mesh in the 
topping flange can give added strength and durability to the slab, particularly if there are 
concentrated or moving loads or if cracking due to shrinkage or thermal movements is likely. An 
area of 0.12 percent of the topping flange is recommended. 
 
ACI code has specified for ribbed slab, as below: 
Ribs must not be less than 4 in wide, and may not have a depth greater than 3.5 times the 
minimum web width. (For easier bar placement and placement of concrete, a minimum web 
width 5 in is desirable. The clear spacing between ribs (determined by the pan width) must not 
exceed30 in. The slab thickness over the top of the pans must not be less than one twelfth the 
clear distance between ribs, nor less than 2 in.Reinforcement for the for the joists usually consists 
of two bars in the positive bending region, with one bar discontinued where no longer needed or 
bent up to provide a part of the negative steel requirement over the supporting girders. Straight 
bars placed to resist negative moments are normally distributed over a width of flange greater 
than that directly over the web, according to the ACI Code requirements for T beams, to control 
the width of flexure cracks. One way joists are generally proportioned with the concrete 
providing all the shear strength, and no stirrups are provided in such case. The thin slab (top 
flange) is reinforced mainly for temperature and shrinkage stresses, using wire mesh or small bars 
placed at right angles to the joists. The area of this reinforcement is usually 0.18 percent of the 
gross cross section of the concrete slab.Design moment coefficients for one way, two way or flat 
slab are obtained from table in the Building Code. For RCC solid slab one ft. strip is designed as 
load bearing beam. In the design of Block slab - strip is considered: block length + rib width+ 
block wall thickness on either side.Dead load plus live load on this strip is calculated. Dead load 
includes: self weight of Block, rib and flange slab.In one way slab blocks are laid in rows keeping 
rib space on either side. For longer span—more than 7.5m—Ceiling block is used. For shorter 
span—less than 4.5 m—though not recommended in the text book the author has designed and 
built many one way slab with partition block successfully.In case of 2 way or flat slab 3 Nos. of 
Ceiling blocks are laid to make a square space of 600 mm x 600mm with rib space on either side. 
This is recommended in the text book and practiced for longer span—more than 5 m. The author 
has designed and built many 2 way or flat slab for smaller span—less than 5 m—with Partition 
1253 
 
block and found successful. Partition block is laid in pair to make rectangular space—390 mm x 
380 mm—with rib space on either side.Design moment, when calculated as above, ‘d’ and later 
‘kd’ should be calculated and must be more than assumed flange slab thickness. Based on 
positive and negative moment reinforcement should be calculated and placed in the rib space 
keeping coded clear cover. This reinforcement can be laid as like slab or beam caging may be 
made with nominal stirrup--#2 @ 300 c/c.  
 
5. Example of Design Calculation of One Way Block Slab  
 
For ready reference of one way slab of 12’-0” Span example of 9.9 clause of ‘SIMPLIFIED 
DESIGN OF REINFORCED CONCRETE’ by HARRY PARKER is referred and for one way 
slab of 24’-0” Span Table-11 &Table-12 of Structural Design-Concrete-7 of ‘TIME- SAVER 
STANDARDS FOR ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN DATA’ by JOHN HANHCOCK 
CALLENDER is referred here: 
 
Example: The floor construction of a building is the beam and girder system with two one-way 
solid slab, as illustrated in Fig below. Let them be required to design the one way slab for an 
interior clear span of 12’-0” & 24-0” respectively in accordance with the following data: live load 
100 psf, floor finish 25 psf and moveable partition load 15 psf. The minimum slab thickness is 
1/35 x span. Design specifications: 
f’c =3000 psi 
       fs =20,000 psi 
fc =1350 psi 
vc = Limited to 60 psi 
v  = Limited to 274 psi 
u  = 3.4√ f’c / D for top bar   
    =4.8√ f’c / D  other than top bar   
[For comparative study solved designs of the books are referred. Only the drawing is 
drawn here. The author here is presenting design calculation for one way slab with block 
with the same parameters as below for convenience of the readers and to make 
comparative study.]  
 
S0LUTION:  The minimum slab  thickness, as per ACI code for the support configuration is: for 
12 ft span= l/35=12x12/35=4.11 in. For block slab let us try with 390mmx190mmx100mm [15.6 
inx7.6 in x 4 in] block and flange slab thickness 50mm= 2 in, rib beam width 100 mm=4 in, rib 
beam depth=6 in   
and for 24 ft span thickness=l/35=24x12/35=8.23 in say 8.5in. For block slab let us try with 
600mmx200mmx200mm [24inx8 in x 8 in] block and flange slab thickness 50 mm= 2 in, rib 
beam width 100 mm=4 in, rib beam depth=8 in. 
 Contribution of Rib block wall and flange slab in load bearing is neglected. 
Load calculation for 12’-0” Span: 
 
Strip width becomes= 15.6+4=19.4 in 
Effective depth of slab = 6-1 =5” 
1254 
 
For 1.58 ft strip (D.L): 
2” Top Solid Slab,    D1 = (2/12) x 1.58x 0.15 = 0.0395 kips/strip/ft 
4” Rib,                     D2 = (4/12) x (4/12)x 0.15 = 0.0167 kips/strip/ft 
No of block in each strip = (12x12)/7.5    = 19.2 say 20 
Wt of block in each strip (0.02 kips/block), 
                                D3 = (20x0.02)/12 = 0.033 kips/strip/ft 
Partition wall load, D4 = 0.015x1.58 = 0.0237 kips/strip/ft 
Floor finish,             D5= 0.025x1.58 = 0.0395 kips/strip/ft 
Total D.L = D1+ D2+ D3+ D4+ D5          =  0.1524 kips/strip/ft 
                        L.L  = 0.10 x 1.58        =  0.158 kips/strip/ft 
Total working  Load (D.L+L.L)                     =  0.3104  kips/strip/ft   
 
Load calculation 24’-0” span 
  
Strip width becomes= 24+4=28 in =2.33ft 
Effective depth of slab = 10-1 =9” 
For 2.33 ft strip (D.L): 
2” Top Solid Slab,    D1 = (2/12) x 2.33x 0.15 = 0.0583 kips/strip/ft 
4” Rib,                     D2 = (4/12) x (8/12)x 0.15 = 0.0333 kips/strip/ft 
No of block in each strip = (24x12)/8 = 36 nos 
Wt of block in each strip (0.045 kips/block), 
                                    D3 = (36x0.045)/24 = 0.0675 kips/strip/ft 
5”Partition wall load, D4 = 0.015x2.333 = 0.035 kips/strip/ft 
Floor finish,                 D5= 0.025x2.333 = 0.0583 kips/strip/ft 
Total D.L = D1+ D2+ D3+ D4+ D5                     =   0.252 kips/strip/ft 
                                        L.L                     =   0.10 x 2.333       
                                                                =   0.233 kips/strip/ft 
Total working Load (D.L+L.L)                                     = 0.485 kips/strip/ft                                                                 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1255 
 
 
 
6. Design Calculation 
 
 
 
W=(D
.L+ 
L.L) 
  
Kips/ 
strip/ft 
Sp
an  
L 
(ft
) 
M-dis            
=C-
dis 
WL2 
k-
ft/Stri
p 
M=
C+ WL2 
k-
ft/Strip         
 
M-
cont             
=C-
cont 
WL2 
k-
ft/Str
‘d’ req 
=√(M/
Rb) 
   (in) 
AS-
dis= 
(Mx1
2)/ 
(fsxjx
d) 
(in2)/
    AS+= 
(Mx12)/ 
(fsxjxd) 
(in2)/Str
ip 
 
 
Spaci
ng      
S 
As-con= 
(Mx12)/ 
(fsxjxd) 
(in2)/Strip 
 
Spaci
ng      
S 
0.3104 
12 1/24x(
0.310
4x 
122) 
1/14x 
(0.3104 
x 122) 
1/10x 
(0.31
04x 
122) 
√(4.47
x1000x
12)/(1.
58x226
x12)  
 
(1.862
4x 
12)/(2
0 
x0.87
2x5) 
(3.193x 
12)/(20 
x0.872x
5) 
(4.47x 
12)/(20 
x0.872x5) 
=0.615 
[0.10(in2) 
/Strip for 
distributio
n] 
 
12mm 
dia 
@7”c/
c  top 
rod 
 
= 1.862
4 
3.193 4.47                                                                                                                                = 3.54”
‹5” ok 
 
0.256 0.44
2-
12mm 
dia 
straig
ht 
botto
m and 
1-
8mm  
extra
botto
m in 
each 
rib 
 
0.515
0.485 
 
 
 
24 
1/24x(
0.485 
x 242) 
1/14x(0.
485 x 
242) 
1/10x 
(0.48
5 x 
242) 
√(27.9
4x1000
x12)/(2
.3333x
226x12
) 
(11.64
x 
12)/(2
0 
x0.87
2x9) 
(19.95x 
12)/(20 
x0.872x
9) 
(27.94x 
12)/(20 
x0.872x9) 
=2.036 
[0.10(in2) 
/Strip for 
distributio
n] 
 
  = 11.64 19.95 27.94 =7.28” ‹9” ok 
 0.889  1.53 
2-
25mm     
dia  
straig
ht 
botto
m 
in 
each 
rib 2.036 
20mm 
dia     
@6”c/
c 
Top 
rod 
1256 
 
 
Figure 2 Plan Of Block Slab 
 
Figure 3 plan of Solid Slab 
 
 
Table 2 Cost estmation of one way slab-solid and block 
 
Solid Slab Block Slab Item 
Qty. Unit Rate Cost(Tk.) Qty. Unit Rate  Cost 
For 12’-0” SPAN 
Cement 22 bag 380 8360.00 12 bag 380 4560.00 
Sand  58 cft 25 1450.00 31 cft 25 775.00 
Shingle 104 cft 42 4368.00 56 cft 42 2352.00 
Rebar 351 kg 60 21060.00 303 kg 60 18180.00 
100mm Block ---- ---- ---- ---- 300 piece 22 6600.00 
                    Total Cost = 35238.00   Total Cost =                  32467.00 
For 24’-0” SPAN 
Cement 37 bag 380 14060 19 bag 380 7220 
Sand  104 cft 25 2600 53 cft 25 1325 
Shingle 186 cft 42 7812 94 cft 42 3948 
Rebar 762 kg 60 45720 584 kg 60 35040 
100mm Block       ---
- 
   144 piece 65 9360 
C
O
ST
 
                        Total Cost =   70192       Total Cost = 56893 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1257 
 
Table 3 Weight Comparison of Solid Slab And Block Slab 
 
Item Solid Slab Block Slab 
     Qty Uni
t 
Wt. 
Total 
Wt(kips) 
  Qty Unit Wt. Total Wt.    
(kips) 
For 12’-0” SPAN 
Concret
e 
120.96 
cft 
 
150  
pcf  
   18.144 64.82cft    150  
pcf 
     9.72 
Block    --- ---     --- 300 nos 0.02kips/ 
blocks 
       6 
 Total      = 18.14 kips        Total   =  15.72kips 
For 24’-0” SPAN 
Concret
e 
216  50  
pcf  
    32.4 110 150  pcf 16.5 
Block ---   ---     144 0.045kips
/blocks 
6.48 
W
E
IG
H
T
 
             Total = 32.4 kips         Total    = 22.98 kips 
 
7. Cost And Weight Comparison Of One Way Slab—Solid And Block:  
 
One way slab of both type are designed and cost calculated for the sake cost comparison. 
Comparative scenario is presented below:   
Type of slab Weight [kg] Cost [Tk] Comparative figure 
 For 12’-0” SPAN 
Solid slab  14400 35238.00 
Block slab 12627 32467.00 
Block slab is  7.86% cheaper  & 
 12.3% lesser in weight 
 For 24’-0” SPAN 
Solid slab 16636.36 70192 
Block slab 11798.50 56893 
Block slab is 18.95% cheaper  & 
 29% lesser in weight 
 
The above comparative scenario explores: Block slab is cheaper and lighter than solid slab. Again 
Longer span Block slab is more cheaper and lighter than shorter span . 
 
8.  Present status of RCC slab with Hollow concrete block  
  
Ceiling block is used in Arab world exclusively. Other than Bangladesh it is gaining popularity. 
In Bangladesh Ceiling block is used in flat slab only and its use is not still well known. The size 
of the ceiling makes it appropriate only in long span slab, more than 4.5m one way and 6mx6m 
1258 
 
two way/ flat slab. Residential buildings excepting palacial one have smaller span. The author has 
designed and built many one way, two way and flat slab with partition block and found successful. 
 
9. Photo of Slab with Block and rebar before casting 
 
Author has designed and built many building slab with block. For easy understanding slab with 
block and rebar prior to casting is demonstrated below: 
 
 
Figure 4 Photo of Slab with Block and rebar before casting 
The author has built his own residential building where he lives and many other buildings with 
block slab. Post construction evaluation of functional performance of the block slab reveals its 
comparative benefits as below: 
• Cost wise cheaper by 8 % for shorter span and 19 % for longer span 
• Room is cooler in Summer and warmer in Winter.  
• Sound insulation is better. 
• Slab is the heaviest load bearing building component. Its weight reduction has cost 
reducing  implication on the design of building components—Beam, Column and 
Foundation. Excitingly weight reduction is observed—12    % for shorter span and 29 % 
for longer span that implicates in improving the sustainability against earthquake in 
overall cost saving. 
 
10. Conclusion 
 
Partition block can also be used along with ceiling block for the construction of all types of 
residential slab construction with  8% cost saving, 12 % weight reduction and with other 
structural and functional benefits. 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
We appreciate the cooperation and efforts of all the engineers and staffs of Engineering Planning 
Consultancy Team.  
 
References: 
1.  Arthur H. Nilson, George Winter, L.C. Urquhart, “ Design of Concrete Structures” 
2.  W.H.Mosley, J.H.Bungey, R.Hulse, “Reinforced Concrete design” 
1259 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
LAND USE PATTERN AND ITS DYNAMICS IN THE SOUTH-WESTERN 
BANGLADESH – A CASE STUDY ON DEBHATA UPAZILA 
 
 
Sadia Afrose1 
 
 
ABSTRACT: The dynamics of the land use pattern has been evaluated considering the land use 
drivers in the south west region Bangladesh. Study area Debhata is situated in the south west area 
adjacent to Sundarban mangrove forest. Data have been analyzed using regression and 
correlation. Rain-fed agriculture had prevailed over the period; today intensive shrimp cultivation 
threatens the sustainability. It was found that the single crop, double and triple crop were 
observed to decrease at a rate of -305.5 ha/yr, -4.065 ha/yr and -8.43 ha/yr respectively. In case of 
double crop in some places was observed to decrease but overall increase in double crop trend. 
The least square value shows that 73% data fitted with the trend line for single crop land. Net 
cropped and total cropped land was observed to decrease at a rate of -336.4 and -311 ha/yr 
respectively. Running fellow land was observed to increase 0.92 ha/yr. Extensive shrimp 
cultivation leading the salinity to rise 4.86 dS/m from 1993-2009 in average. Salinity affecting 
the robi crop cultivation and all over increasing the running fellow land. Population pressure is 
leading the people with extensive infrastructural development decreasing the cultivable land. 
Shrimp cultivation was observed to rise with a rate of 201.8 ha/yr where the least square value 
shows that 88% data fitted with the trend line and salinity affecting the land use pattern as the 
negative consequences. Hence the land use pattern of this area is diverse and conflicting. Need 
sustainable and planned management under the conflicts of land use pattern. 
 
Keywords: Neat Crop Land, Salinity Intrusion, Shrimp Cultivation, Coastal Embankment, Polder. 
 
1. Introduction 
 
1.1. Background 
 
Land is the most valuable resource of earth. Land use pattern and its change are very much 
important to understand recent changes in the Earth system.  The scientific community needs 
Comprehensive knowledge of these dynamics may be useful to understand past land-use/land 
cover changes and also predict future changes. So, therefore it is very important to evaluate the 
                                                        
1 MS Student, Disaster Management,  Geography and Environment Department, University of Dhaka, 
Bangladesh. Lusi_ku04@yahoo.com 
 
1260 
 
magnitude, pattern, and type of land use/cover changes for projecting future land development 
(Mundia, 2006). 
 
Land is the basic element that provide habitat and sustenance for living organism and  Land cover 
refers to the physical and biological cover over the surface of land, including water, vegetation, 
bare soil, and/or artificial structures. In general land use means human activities that are directly 
related to land, making use of its resources or having an impact upon it. Natural scientists define 
land use in terms of syndromes of human activities such as agriculture, forestry and building 
construction that alter land surface processes including biogeochemistry, hydrology and 
biodiversity (Encyclopedia of Earth, 2007). According to (Erb et al., 2007)  Land use is a process 
at the interface of social and ecological systems.  
 
During the last half century, the land use patterns in the world have undergone a major change 
over the years with a sharp increase in urbanization, cities but a marked decline in cropland and 
forests. As a result, increase in food scarcity, land degradation and desertification. At present 
Land-use and land-cover change (LULCC); is a global issue of the entire world as well as 
Bangladesh. In the last few years dramatic change occur in land use pattern of the country. 
 
 Bangladesh is an agricultural country. About 75% people directly or indirectly depend on 
agriculture. Coastal area is mainly used for agriculture. In South-West region of Bangladesh 
about 75% of the floodplain area is flooded deeper than 30 cm for 3-5 months in the rainy season 
(Brammer, 2000). In addition, to minimize the impact of natural disasters, salinity intrusion as 
well as to achieve the aim of agricultural production, sustainable and cost-effective maintenance 
polders are build in the coastal region. But few days later it was seen that the polder itself became 
one of the main constraints of paddy cultivation and had boosted up the shrimp culture which 
create a conflicting issue.  
 
After 1960s the south west region of Bangladesh has been facing a major problem, shrimp 
cultivation are leading to environmental degradation.  Long-term inundation of saline water in 
shrimp cultivation has significantly affected, the soil become more saline than the intrusion of 
saline water in the river. So it is a major local cultural issue. Mainly polders are build to protect 
the land from salinity intrusion and tidal flood. But later maximum shrimp ghers are initiated 
Adjacent of the polders. It is hence, conflicting too.  
 
So, sustainable land use management is essential for land use/cover changes as well as 
environmental and social economic condition. 
 
1.1 Objectives of the Study  
 
To identify the trend of land use pattern, it’s change and determining factors which are 
responsible for changes in land use pattern in the study area 
 
2. Study Area 
 
Debhata upazila is situated in Satkhira district. It is one of the Southwest coastal regions of 
Bangladesh. It consists of 5 union parishads, 58 mouzas and 116 villages. Main rivers are   
Ichamati, Kholpoya, and Labangabati (Banglapedia, 2006).  
1261 
 
 
In Satkhira district there are 9 polders which are divided into two divisions that are division-1 and 
division-2. Debhata upazila placed under division-1. The polder no of Debhata upazila is 1 and 3. 
The total areas of unions are in the following table. 
 
                                           Table: Amount of land in Debhata Upazila  
 
  Name of Union Amount of land             in hc 
    01      Kuliya       5,451 
     02        Paruliya       4,384 
     03       Debhata       2,067 
     04        Sakhipur       1,358 
      05       Nawapara       3,847 
               TOTAL       17,107 
                                                         
                                          Source: Census of Debhata upazila, 1991 
         
2.1 Physical and Biological Characteristics 
 
Study area are consisted with three types of land such as, 
1. Ganges floodplain 
2. Ganges tidal flood plain 
3. Mixed tidal flood plain and organic beel area 
 
Ganges floodplain  of that area is about 5539 hc and nearly one third of the total area. This area is 
from north to south alongside and nearly mid of Ichamati river. This area is about 1 – 2 km in 
wide. 
 
Ganges tidal floodplain consisted about 63% of the area. Tidal movement dominates this area, 
results with extreme sedimentation. Mostly are floodplains of this area. 
Mixed tidal floodplain and organic beel area is nearly about 5% and 860 hc. This area originated 
from rotten plant and grass. 
  
Annual maximum average temperatures are 31.17°C and that’s occurring between March and 
October. Annual minimum temperatures is 22.0°C and that’s occur November to February. 
  
Average rainfall in my study area is 130.3 mm/yr. The main source of rainfall is the southwest 
monsoon. About 87% of total rainfall occurs during May to September (Satkhira Meteorological 
station, 2009). 
  
1262 
 
The area of subsidence and deposition contain an almost complete sequence from Cretaceous to 
recent alluvium (Rahman et al., 2000). Gangetic alluvium is rich in calcium, magnesium and 
potassium. Main crops Paddy, mustard seed, potato, patal, onion.Extinct or nearly extinct crops 
Linseed, tobacco, jute, khesari, sola.Main fruits are Mango, litchi and coconut. 
 
3. Methodology 
 
Study area is selected according to the objectives of the study. An upazila named Debhata under 
Satkhira district is selected. Here during the last thirty years a rapid change occur in the land use 
patterns, agricultural land shifted to excessive shrimp ghers. 
The research has been conducted through secondary source. Secondary information was collected 
from different government organization. E.g.  
 Agricultural office, Fisheries office, Statistical office and LGED of Debhata upazila. 
 Water Development Board, Satkhira  
 Soil Resource Institute, Khulna  
and some related books, journal, seminar papers, newspapers, recent related publications, thesis 
papers and reports etc. 
 
In this stage, all the collected data were classified through tabular form according to the 
objectives. Data, after editing were processed and analyzed with the help of computer software 
MS EXCELL, SPSS, other statistical tools for graphical analysis, regression analysis and 
correlation.                                                                                                
Positive and negative trend of the parameters of Debhata upazila located in the south west 
Bangladesh were analyzed with regression analysis to observe the linear trend pattern among the 
variables. The trend pattern was evaluated from the equation y=mx+c.  
Where m impels the rate or trend value per year and least square value R2 reveals the significant 
number to fit with the trend line.  
 
4. Result and Discussion 
4.1 Trend of Land Use Pattern 
4.1.1 Single cropped land 
   
Figure 4.1 The trends of Single cropped land in Debhata union 
** same color indicates trend line & linear curve. 
In total Debhata upazila, 
single cropped land is 
decreasing. The possible 
reasons are crop land shifted 
to shrimp farms and can’t 
satisfy their food demand 
because of rising population. 
1263 
 
The value with x express trend line of that union. When the value is (-) that means negative trend, 
(+) means positive trend. The least square value R2 reveals the significant number to fit with the 
trend line.  
In this figure the trends of Single cropped land are -335 in Debhata upazilarespectively which 
express negative trends. And the least square values are 0.73 respectively.  
So this value indicates that 73 data are fitted to the trend lines in these three unions. 
4.1.2 Double cropped land 
 
   
Figure 4.2 The trends of double cropped land in Debhata upazila 
 
4.1.3 Triple cropped land 
 
   
Figure 4.3 The trends of triple cropped land in Debhata upazila 
 
 
 
From the data analysis, it 
reviews that double cropped 
land in Debhata upazila are 
increasing because of declining 
land resource, to satisfy food 
demand, shrimp farm 
development and rising 
population. 
This figure shows decreased trend 
line. In winter season there is no 
rainfall, irrigation totally depend 
on surface water but during this 
period water became more saline. 
As a result winter crops are 
decreasing day by day.  
1264 
 
 
4.1.4 Neat cropped land 
 
Figure 4.4 The trends of neat cropped land in Debhata upazila 
 
4.1.5 Total crop land 
 
Figure 4.5 The trends of total cropped land in Debhata upazila 
 
4.1.6 Total Unavailable land for cultivation of Debhata Upozila 
 
Figure 4.6 The trends of unavailable land for cultivation in Debhata upazila 
The figure  shows negative 
trends. The decreased trend is 
observed over the period in 
the study area. The possible 
reasons might be- decreasing 
cultivated land, increasing 
infrastructure and 
development of shrimp 
cultivation etc. 
The figure express a negative 
trends. Total crop land are also 
decreasing  of Debhata upazila due 
to population pressure, 
development of infrastructure and 
shrimp farm, increase soil salinity 
aroud the shrimp farm & salinity 
intrusion from the river. 
1265 
 
4.1.7 Running fellow land 
 
Figure 4.7 The trends of running fellow land in Debhata Upazila. 
4.1.8 Robi crop 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.8 The trends of Robi crop in Debhata upazila. 
4.1.9 Kharip – 1 crop 
 
Figure 4.9 The trend of Kharip-1 crop in Debhata upazila. 
The figure indicates a positive 
trend. unavailable land for 
cultivation in Debhata upazila 
have increased and the possible 
reasons are Excessive shrimp 
culture in agricultural land and 
build up in house hold, school - 
college agricultural land cause 
of population pressure. 
The figure shows negative trend. The 
duration of robi crop is 15th October – 
17th March that means winter period. 
In winter period surface water became 
more saline due to entrance of river 
water by polder. Besides it is perfect 
time for shrimp culture. So, 
unavailable for irrigation , salinity 
intrusion and shrimp farm is 
responsible to decrease the robi crop.  
The fig. showsKharip—1 crop has 
decreased. The duration of kharip -1 crop 
is 17th   March – 21th May. This time is 
very temperate weather and less rainfall. 
Surface water level has decreased and 
became more saline. Ground water level 
is also decreased due to less rainfall.  So, 
irrigation problem is the main cause to 
decrease kharip -1 crop cover land. 
1266 
 
4.1.10 Kharip – 2 crop 
 
 Figure 4.10 The trends of Kharip-2 crop in Debhata upazila.  
4.1.11. Perennial crop 
 
Figure 4.11 The trends of Perennial crop land in Debhata  upazila. 
4.1.12 Irrigated land by deep tubewell 
 
Figure 4.12 The trends of Irrigated land by Deep tubewel in Debhata upazila. 
The fig. indicates negative trend. 
Kharip-2 crop land has decreased  but 
comparatively less than robi and 
kharip-1 crop. Duration of kharip-2 is 
1st June - 15th October.  Heavy 
rainfall occurs in this time.  Average 
rainfall is 700mm - 1200mm (Data 
source. BMD).  Surface water 
became less saline and usable for 
irrigation. Ground water level is also 
increased due to proper rainfall.  
The fig shows perennial crop has 
also decreased due to shrimp 
farms, salinity intrusion, and 
development of infrastructure. 
 
From the figure decreased trend is 
observed regarding irrigated land 
deep tube well over the period in 
the study area. The possible 
reasons might be Salinity 
intrusion, In summer period 
ground water level is decreased 
 
1267 
 
4.1.13  Irrigated land by shallow tubewell 
 
Figure 4.13 The trends of Irrigated land by Shallow tubewell-2 in Debhata upazila. 
4.1.14Pond cover land 
 
Figure 4.14 The trends of Pond cover land in Debhata upazila. 
4.1.15 House hold land 
 
Figure 4.15 The trends of house hold land in Debhata upazila. 
The fig indicates the amount of 
irrigated land by shallow tube well 
has also decreased. 
The figure shows  In total Debhata 
upazila pond cover land has 
decreased. The ponds around the 
shrimp farms years after years 
gradually turn to saline water. So, 
shallow ponds are shifted to 
shrimp farms. It is the main cause 
to decrease ponds in this region 
 
The figure shows that trends of 
house hold land has increased 
gradually due to rising population. 
 
1268 
 
4.1.16 Infrastructure cover land 
 
Figure 4.16 The trends of school-college in Debhata upazila. 
4.1.17 Poultry and Dairy farm 
 
Figure 4.17  The trends of poultry and dairy in Debhata upazila. 
4.1.18 Road and Railway 
   
Figure 4.18 The trends of office and business area  in Debhata upazila. 
The fig indicates positive trend. 
Road & railway cover land of 
Debhata upazila has decreased day 
by day. 
1269 
 
4.1.19 Riverine land 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.19 The trends of riverine land  in Debhata upazila 
4.1.20 Prawn farm 
 
Figure 4.20 The trends of Prawn farming land in Debhata upazila. 
4.1.21 Shrimp farm 
 
Figure 4.21 The trends of Shrimp farming land in Debhata upazila. 
1270 
 
From the figure  a rapid changed have observed during 95 to 96 period shrimp farm is increasing 
in Debhata Upazila. Again a radical change occurred  during 2006 to 2007. 
 
4.1.22 Salinity range 
 
Figure 4.22 Salinity range of Debhata Upazila 
From the figure it indicates that the salinity of the study area is observed to go with a draftical 
change from 1993 to 2009. It shows that in 1993 the average salinity was 5.62 and the current 
salinity in 2009 is 10.48. So, in 2009 the salinity increased 4.86. 
 
5. Conclusion 
The findings presented in this paper show that the land use of Debhata area has been under gone 
with dynamic changes. The changes have been found after 1995-1997 mostly. Single and triple 
cropped lands have observed to decrease with the course of time. Double cop land trend found to 
be rise slightly. Crops lands have been reduced as consequences of prone farm (shrimp gher) rise. 
Salinity rise as a consequences of shrimp gher, population pressure lead the crop land into 
uncultivable land. Even the pond found to be decrease because of acquiring the pond as shrimp 
gher. So the land use changes have changed as the negatives of regional environmental changes. 
Although the analysis presented here was performed on a small case study area, these results may 
provide an important step towards to understand the regional environmental factors that are 
altering the land use pattern of the area. Due to bringing of saline water from the river by cutting 
off the polder causes drastic changes in the livelihood of the people as well as environmental 
degradation. Continuation of the situation would lead a major threat for the food security and 
traditional livelihood pattern.  
 
References 
 
Brown.Daniel G(2005), Land use and forest cover on private parcels in the Upper Midwest USA, 
1970 to 1990, Journal of Land Use Science, Volume 2, Issue 3 September . 
1271 
 
 C. Michael, Ohmann .Janet L(2002), A multi-scale assessment of human and environmental 
constraints on forest land cover change on the Oregon (USA) coast range Kluwer Academic 
Publishers. 
Erb. Karl-Heinz ,  Gaube .Veronika , Krausmann.  Fridolin , Plutzar .Christoph (2007), A 
comprehensive global 5 min resolution land-use data set for the year 2000 consistent with 
national census data, Journal of Land Use Science, Volume 2, Issue 3 September 2007 , 
pages 191 - 224). 
Fatima. Shailey (2009), The social, environmental and economic destruction that results     from 
the plunder of land in Bangladesh by the shrimp industry is pitiful, Asia Solidarity Against 
Industrial Aquaculture. 
Fernando. Karin, Perera. Nishanthi (2004), Sustainable Land Management: South Asia                     
Perspectives, South  Asia Cooperative Environmental Programme. 
Hietel .Elke , Waldhardt. Otte .Rainer(2004), Analysing land-cover changes in relation to 
environmental variables in Hesse, Germany, Landscape Ecology 18: 777–790, 2003. Kluwer 
Academic Publishers.  
Hietel .Elke , Waldhardt. Rainer , Otte .Annettem(2004), Analysing land-cover changes in 
relation to environmental variables in Hesse, Germany, Landscape Ecology 18: 144–290, 
2004. Kluwer Academic  Publishers. 
Hole, Frank (2007),Drivers of Unsustainable Land Use in the Semi-Arid, Journal of Land Use 
Science, Volume 2, Issue 3 September 2008. 
Hole. Frank (2008), Drivers of Unsustainable Land Use in the Semi-Arid Khabur River            
Basin, Syria, Geographical Research, March 2009 47(1):4–14 
Kok .Kasper, Veldkamp. A (2001), Evaluating impact of spatial scales on land use pattern 
        analysis in Central America, Evaluating impact of spatial scales on land use pattern 
analysis in Central America. 
Lambin , E.F et al., (2007), Land-Use and Land-Cover Change (LUCC) Implementation Strategy 
Project report of the International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme and the International 
Human Dimensions Programme on Global Environmental Change. 
Mia .Abdul Halim , Islam .M. Rafiqul (2005), A Systems Analysis of Shrimp Production, 
Integrated Coastal Zone Management Plan (PDO-ICZMP) Coastal Land Uses and Indicative 
Land Zones, Working Paper WP040.  
Mundia. C. N, Aniya, M (2004), Dynamics of land Use cover/ Cover Changes and degradation of 
Nairobi City, Kenya, land degradation & development Land Degrad. Develop. 17: 97–108 
(2006), Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com). DOI: 10.1002/ldr.702 
Zenga .Y. N,Wua .G. P, Zhanb. F. B , Zhanga.H.(2003),Modeling Spatial Land Use Pattern using 
auto logistic regression, Landscape Ecology 18: 777–790, 2004. Kluwer Academic 
Publishers.  
 
1272 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
BIOSORPTION OF CONGO-RED DYE ON “AZADIRACHTA INDICA” LEAF 
POWDER  
 
 
Maksudur R. Khan1, Zobayer Bin Mukhlish 2, M. R. Karim3 and T. K. Deb4 
 
 
ABSTRACT: Azadirachta indica (neem) Leaf Powder has been investigated as low cost and eco 
friendly adsorbent prepared for the removal Congo red (CR), a carcinogenic dye which comes 
from the effluents of textile industries during dyeing and rinsing processes from aqueous solution. 
Various sorption parameters such as effect of pH, contact time, initial concentration of congo red 
and amount of adsorbent dose on the adsorption capacity of the adsorbent were studied. The 
percentage removal of congo red increased with decrease in the initial concentration of congo red 
and increased with the increase in the contact time and the dose of adsorbent. Congo red showed 
a maximum removal of 90.5% at pH 3 and decreased to 67.3% at pH 10. The well known 
Freundlich and Langmuir isotherm equations were applied for the equilibrium adsorption data 
and the various isotherm parameters were evaluated. The equilibrium data were well fitted to the 
Langmuir and Freundlich isotherm models. The adsorptions of congo red follow second-order 
rate kinetics.. 
 
Keywords: Congo-red, Azadirachta indica, biosorption, Freundlich adsorption Isotherm; 
Langmuir adsorption Isotherm. 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Day by day, gradual industrialization and urbanization leading more production of waste material 
and exposing it to the environment. Industrial effluents discharged from dyeing industries are 
highly colored with a large amount of suspended organic solid (Ozcan et al.). These effluents are 
discharge into rivers makes water unfit for domestic, agricultural and industrial purposes. Dyes 
are widely used in many industries such as textile, leather, pulp& paper and plastics in order to 
color their products. About 700,000 tons and 10,000 different types of dyes and pigments are 
                                                        
1 Professor, Faculty of Chemical & Natural Resources, University of Malaysia 
Pahang.(mrkhancep@yahoo.com) 
2Lecturer,  Department Of Chemical Engineering and Polymer Science, SUST, Sylhet, Bangladesh. 
(zobayer_ceps@yahoo.com) 
3Under-graduate research Student, Department Of Chemical Engineering and Polymer Science, SUST, 
Sylhet, Bangladesh.( rezasustcep48@yahoo.com) 
4Under-graduate research Student, Department Of Chemical Engineering and Polymer Science, SUST,
 Sylhet, Bangladesh.(tanmoy_cep@yahoo.com) 
 
 
 
1273 
 
being produced annually across the world (R. Gong et al., V.S. Mane et al.). Many dyes and their 
break down products may be toxic for living organisms (Sarioglu et al.). 
   It is rather difficult to treat the textile wastewater by conventional biological and physical–
chemical processes because of the complex molecular structure of the dyes. Therefore, innovative 
treatment methods are being investigated. Among the various treatment options available for the 
removal of dyes from textile effluents, adsorption is one of the most effective treatment methods 
(T. Robinson et al.).Activated carbons are widely used as adsorbents for the removal of dyes from 
wastewater. However, use of activated carbon for large scale removal of dyes is quite expensive. 
Consequently many researchers have studied the feasibility of using low-cost substances as 
alternative to costly activated carbons. Materials like modified rice straw (R. Gong et al.), fly ash 
[V.S. Mane et al., S.Wang, et al.), rice husk (V. Ponnusami et al. ,V. Vadivelan et al.), chemically 
treated guava leaf powder (D.K. Singh et al.), phoenix tree leaves (R. Han et al.), wheat shell (Y. 
Bulut et al.), banana and orange peels (G. Annadurai et al.), etc., have been studied. Many agro-
wastes are arbitrarily discarded or set on fire generating CO2 and other forms of air pollution. 
The exploitation and utilization of these materials must bring obvious economic and social 
benefits to mankind. 
   In this present study Congo red (CR) , an anionic dye widely used in textiles, paper, rubber 
and plastic industries. The present study is undertaken with a view to assess the feasibility of 
abundantly available Azadirachta indica (Neem) leaf powder as an adsorbent for the congo red 
removal. The effects of various parameters such as adsorbent dose, pH, contact time and initial 
CR concentration on the adsorption process have been studied. Also modeling is carried out on 
the basis of pseudo 1st and 2nd order model. 
 
2. Experimental  
 
2.1. Preparation of Adsorbent  
 
The leafs of Azadirachta indica (Neem) used in this experiment was collected from local area of 
Sylhet district. The young, fresh leafs was separated and washed several times with distilled 
water to remove the surface adhered dust and unwanted contaminants and then boiled in distilled 
water to remove coloring constituents with changing the water until the water became colorless. 
Then it was dried in an air oven at 90±5 OC until almost all the moisture evaporated and the leafs 
became crispy. It was ground by a blender and sieved to get the particle size <0.30mm and 
preserved in a clean glass bottle for use as a Neem Leaf Powder Bio-adsorbent (NLPA) bio-
adsorbent. 
Table 1 Constituents of Neem 
 
Constituents Percentage (%) 
Water 60 
Carbohydrates 23 
Proteins 7 
Fat 1 
Mineral >3 
1274 
 
2.2. Preparation of Stock Solution 
Congo Red (CR) (Direct Red 28, C.I. 22120, azo dye) supplied by MERK (Germany) were used 
as adsorbate without further purification. A 1000 ppm stock solution of were prepared by 
dissolving 1000 mg of it in 1000 ml of distilled water and the required solutions are prepared by 
suitably dilution of it. The structure of this dye is shown in Figure 2. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2: Structure of Congo red 
 
2.3. Batch Adsorption Studies 
The adsorption experiments were carried out on batch process. The batch process were carried 
out in 300 ml conical flasks by mixing pre weighted amount of NLPA and 200 ml of dye solution 
of desired concentration .The flasks were kept in a shaker at 450 rpm oscillation for 
predetermined time interval at a constant temperature .The parameters such as pH, time of 
contact, adsorbent amount, dye concentration were varied during the different sets of batch 
experiments. At fixed time intervals, sample of dye solution was taken and concentration of CR 
was analyzed using a UV-VIS Spectrophotometer at λmax = 497.50 nm. pH of the solution was 
adjusted before addition of adsorbent using 0.1 N HCl and 0.1 N NaOH. All the experiments 
were carried out at room temperature of 25±2 OC. Amount of dye uptake, q (mg/g), was 
calculated using the following equation: 
……………………….. (1) 
Where Ci (mg/l) is the initial dye concentration, Cf (mg/l) is the dye concentration after 
adsorption, W (g) is the amount of biosorbent and V (ml) is the volume of the solution. 
 
 
3. Theory 
 
3.1. Adsorption isotherm 
 
The isotherm models of Langmuir (Langmuir et al.) and Freundlich (Freundlich et al) were fitted 
to describe the equilibrium adsorption. These equations of isotherms were given below: 
……………………………… (2) 
Where, qe is the amount of CR adsorbed per unit mass of adsorbent (mg/g) and Ce is the 
concentration of the dye solution at equilibrium (mg/L). Vm and b is Langmuir constants related 
to the capacity and energy of sorption respectively. The values Vm and b shown in Table 3 were 
determined from slopes and intercepts of the plot of Ce / qe Vs Ce (Fig.5). The maximum 
sorption capacity (Vm) was 54.945 mg dye per gram of the NLPA for CR. 
 
1275 
 
 
RL = 1/1 + b. C0  …………………………………….(3) 
 
 
The essential characteristics of Langmuir isotherm can be expressed by a dimensionless constant 
called equilibrium parameter16 RL that is defined by the following equation: 
………………… (4) 
Where, Co is initial dye concentration (mg/L).RL value obtained using equation (2) for 100mg/L 
CR concentration are 0.7918. RL values between 0 &1 confirming that the adsorption isotherm is 
favorable (Bhatnagar et al.) RL indicates isotherm shape and whether it is favorable or not as per 
the criteria given below. 
Table 1 : RL indicating isotherm shape and whether it is favorable or not as per the 
criteria 
RL values Adsorption 
RL > 1 Unfavorable 
RL =1 Linear 
0< RL <1 Favorable 
RL =0 Irreversible 
 
The linear form of the Freundlich equation is as follows: 
 
Where, log K is a measure of the adsorption capacity and n is an indicator of adsorption intensity  
The Freundlich coefficient, 1/n,which should have values in the range of 0 to 1 for favorable 
adsorption. A plot of log qe Vs log Ce gives a slope of 1/n and intercept of log K shown in Figure 
4. The value 1/n and K were calculated from slope and intercept respectively and are given in                
Table 3. 
 
3.2. Adsorption Kinetics 
In order to investigate the mechanism of sorption, two kinetic models were tested: a pseudo first- 
order and a Pseudo second order model. 
 
3.2.1. Pseudo First-order Model  
 
Lagergren’s rate equation is most widely used (Monser L.and Adhoum et al.) for the adsorption 
of adsorbate from a solution. 
The first order Lagergren’s rate equation expressed as follows: 
 
………………………. (5) 
 
Where qe and qt (both in mg/g) are the solute amounts adsorbed per unit mass of adsorbent at 
equilibrium and at time t (min), respectively, K1 (min-1) is the first-order rate constant. The values 
of K1 and 
qe were calculated from the slope and the intercept of the plots versus t, respectively 
for different concentrations of CR. Calculated values of K1 and qe are summarized in Table 4.The 
1276 
 
experimental qe values do not agree with the calculated ones, obtained from the linear plots. This 
shows that the adsorption of CR onto NLP is not a pseudo first order kinetic. 
 
3.2.2. Pseudo Second order Model 
 
Pseudo second-order equation (Ho Y.S. et al.) based on equilibrium adsorption is expressed as: 
 
…………………………………. (6) 
 
Where, K2 (g/mg min) is the rates constant of second-order adsorption. If second-order kinetics is 
applicable, the plot of t/q versus t should show a linear relationship. qe and K2 can be determined 
from the slope and intercept of the plot. Calculated values of modelparameters are summarized in 
Table 4. 
 
 
4. Results and Discussion 
 
4.1 Adsorption isotherm study 
 
The resulted model parameters of Langmuir & Freundlich isotherm are plotted for different initial 
dye concentration with constant adsorbent loading in Figure: 1 &2 and the determined model 
parameters are tabulated in Table: 2. 
 
4.2. Effect of Adsorbent Dose 
 
The effect of adsorbent dose was studied with 50 ml CR solution of concentration 20 mg/L with 
varying adsorbent dose from 0.05 to 1.0 gm. /100mL at pH 5.7 shown in fig. 4. The percent CR 
removal increase as the adsorbent dose increase due to increase in total number of exchange sites. 
However the amount of CR adsorbed per unit weight of adsorbent decrease with increase in 
adsorbent dose. It is illustrated in figure 5. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3 : Langmuir isotherm model. 
1277 
 
 
 
Figure 4 : Freundlich isotherm model. 
 
Table 2 : Langmuir and Freundlich constants 
 
Langmuir Constants Freundlich Constants 
Vm (mg/g) 1 b (l/mg) R2 K n R2 
54.945 0.00262 0.8585 7.45138 1.598721023 0.9384 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5 : Effect of adsorbent dose on congo red adsorption by NLPA (Congo red concentration: 
100 mg/L, pH: 5.7, agitation time: 24 hours.) 
 
4.3. Effect of Contact Time 
 
The effect of contact time on the amount of CR adsorbed was investigated using 50 and 125 mg/L 
initial concentration of CR with 4.5 g/L NLPA at pH 5.7. The extent of removal of CR by NLPA 
was found to increase, reach a maximum value with increase in contact time shown in Fig. 6.  
   
4.4. Effect of pH 
 
Congo red is a di-azo dye. It was reported that below pH 2 its solution changed color from red to 
dark blue and the original red color was different above pH 10(Lorenc et al.). Therefore, effect of  
1278 
 
   
 
               
Figure 6: effcet of contact time on adsorbtion density. 
 
 
 
Figure 7: effect of pH (100 ppm CR solution,2gm NLPA/L) 
 
solution pH was studied between 2 and 10. As the pH decrease 10 to 5 the percent adsorption 
decreases from 90.20 to 6.11%% and from pH 3 to 10 . Fig. 2 illustrates this effect of initial pH 
of dye solution on the adsorption of congo red for initial dye concentration of 100 mg/L with 
adsorbent dose of 2gm NLPA/L. 
 
4.5. Kinetic modeling 
 
The result of kinetic modeling is tabulated in table 4.The linear plots of t/qt versus t (Fig. 8) show 
a good agreement between experimental and calculated qe values are presented in Table 4. The 
correlation coefficients for the second order kinetic model are greater than that of 1st order (not 
shown here) and indicate the applicability of this second order kinetic equation. This shows that 
the adsorption process of CR onto NLPA is a pseudo second-order nature. 
 
 
1279 
 
 
 
Figure 8 : Pseudo second order plot for Adsoption of CR by NLPA. 
 
Table 3 : Kinetic model values for adsorption of CR onto NLPA 
 
Concentration 
of Congo red 
(ppm) 
Pseudo first-order Order Pseudo second order 
qe , cal 
(Kg/Kg) 
K1 
(min-1) R
2 qe , cal (mg/g) 
K2 
(g/mg·min) R
2 
50 5.3121 0.001 0.84 5.633802817 0.00276832 0.9585 
125 5.3677 0.0003 0.81 14.02524544 0.002305006 0.9424 
 
These are typed in plain italics with a capital initial, at the left-hand margin. There is one line 
space above, but no line space below the heading. 
 
5. Conclusions 
 
From the result of this study it can be concluded that NLPA could be used effectively for the 
removal of congo red from aqueous solution. The adsorption was found to be pH sensitive and at 
lower pH the adsorption capacity is higher. Kinetic data fitted well in pseudo second order model 
and also the rate constant is evaluated. 
    
References 
 
Monser L.and Adhoum N., Tartrazine modified activated carbon for the removal of Pb(II), Cd(II) 
and Cr(III), Journal of Hazardous Materials, 2009, 161, 263–. 
Ho Y.S. and McKay G., Pseudo-second order model for sorption processes, Process 
Biochem.,1999, 34, 450–465. 
Langmuir I., The constitution and fundamental properties of solids and liquids, J. Am. Chem. 
Soc., 1916, 38, 2221–2295. 
Freundlich H., Uber die adsorption in losungen, Zeitschrift fur Physikalische Chemie, 1906, 57, 
385-471. 
Bhatnagar Amit , Removal of bromophenols fromwater using industrial wastes as low 
costadsorbents, Journal of Hazardous Materials, 2007,B139, 93–102. 
Lorenc-Grabowska E. and Gryglewicz G., Adsorption characteristics of Congo red on coalbased 
1280 
 
meso porous activated carbon, Dyes Pigments, 2007, 74, 34–40. 
Ozcan A.S. and Ozcan A., Adsorption of acid dyes from aqueous solutions onto acidactivated 
bentonite, J. Colloid Interf. Sci., 2004, 276, 39–46. 
Sarioglu M. and Atay U. A.,Removal of methylene blue by using biosolid, Global NEST Journal, 
2006, 8(2), 113-120. 
R. Gong,Y. Jin, J. Chen,Y. Hu, J. Sun, Removal of basic dyes from aqueous solution by sorption 
on phosphoric acid modified rice straw, Dyes Pigments 73 (2007) 332–337. 
V.S. Mane, I.D. Mall,V.C. Srivastava, Use of bagasse fly ash as an adsorbent for the removal of 
brilliant green dye from aqueous solution, Dyes Pigments 73 (2007) 269–278. 
T. Robinson, G. McMullan, R. Marchant, P. Nigam, Remediation of dyes in textile effluent: a 
critical review on current treatment technologies with a proposed alternative, Biores. Tech. 
77(2001) 247– 255. 
S.Wang,Y. Boyjoo, A. Choueib,Acomparative study of dye removal using fly ash treated by 
different methods, Chemosphere 60 (2005) 1401–1407. 
V. Ponnusami, V. Krithika, R. Madhuram, S.N. Srivastava, Biosorption of reactive dye using 
acid-treated rice husk: factorial design analysis, J. Hazard. Mater. 142 (2007) 397–403. 
V. Vadivelan, K.V. Kumar, Equilibrium, kinetics, mechanism, and process design for the sorption 
of methylene blue onto rice husk, J. Coll. Interface Sci. 286 (2005) 90–100. 
D.K. Singh, B. Srivastava, Removal of basic dyes from aqueous solutions by chemically treated 
Psidium guyava leaves, Indian J. Environ. Health 41 (1999) 333–345. 
R. Han,W. Zou,W.Yu, S. Cheng,Y.Wang, J. Shi, Biosorption of methylene blue from aqueous 
solution by fallen phoenix tree’s leaves, J. Hazard. Mater . 141 (2007) 156–162. 
Y. Bulut, H. Aydın, A kinetics and thermodynamics study of methylene blue adsorption on wheat 
shells, Desalination 194 (2006) 259–267. 
G. Annadurai, J. Ruey-shin, L. Duu-Jong, Use of cellulose-based waste for adsorption of dyes 
from aqueous solutions , J .Hazard Mater. B92 (2002) 263–274. 
 
 
1281 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
IMPACT OF CLIMATE CHANGE ON MAJOR WATER RELATED DISASTERS IN THE 
COASTAL AREA OF BANGLADESH  
 
 
M. Monowar Hossain1, Md. Mobassarul Hasan2 and Zahirul Haque Khan3 
 
 
ABSTRACT: Bangladesh has 710 km long coastline and about 28% of the population live in the 
coastal area. The coastal region is prone to multi-hazard threats such as cyclonic storm surge, 
coastal flooding, water logging, salinity intrusion, coastal erosion and above all, climate change. 
Due to its geophysical setting it is frequently visited by the cyclone-induced storm surge and 
during the last 48 years nineteen (19) major cyclones devastated the coastal area. Salinity 
intrusion is another disaster in the coastal area and it affects the southwest part severely. The 
assessment of climate change impact and evaluation of potential adaptive measures requires use 
of scientifically based and tested state-of-the-art mathematical modelling tools. This paper 
presents the potential impacts of climate change on cyclonic storm surge and salinity intrusion. 
Adaptive measures such as increase of upstream flow, mangrove afforestation, cyclone shelter 
and raising of embankment crest level have also been analyzed.   
 
In this study severe cyclone SIDR (in 2007) was selected to assess the vulnerability as it has the 
highest wind speed compared to other cyclones. To assess the impact of SIDR on the whole 
coastal area five different tracks were selected such that its impact covers the whole coastal area 
and cyclone SIDR was imposed in each track. According to 4th IPCC report, if temperature is 
increased by 2oC wind speed will be increased by 10% and it was considered in the study. Again 
according to the Synthesis Report of Copenhagen Summit on March 2009 maximum sea level 
rise (SLR) will be 1±0.5m by 2100. For this study 60cm SLR for 2050 and 120cm SLR for 2100 
were selected.  From the simulation of past cyclones (1960-2009) it has been found that 63 
coastal polders (an area bounded by earthen embankment) are overtopped whereas if SIDR 
comes along the selected five tracks with 10% increased wind speed and 60cm SLR 103 polder 
will be overtopped. It has also been found that high risk area (inundation depth>1m) in the 
coastal region is likely to be increased by 220% in 2050 compared to 1993. Again from the model 
simulation it has been found that 5ppt saline line will intrude 55km due to 60cm SLR and 95km 
due to 120cm SLR towards land in the southwest region. Halda river is the only spawning ground 
for Indian carps and it needs saline free water. If sea level will rise by 120cm, where the 
maximum salinity level is 0.5 ppt in Halda river will increase to 2.5ppt which is not suitable 
spawning.  
                                                        
1Executive Director, Institute of Water Modelling, House-496, Road-32, New DOHS, Mohakhali, Dhaka-
1206, Bangladesh 
2Coastal Hydraulic Engineer, Coast, Port & Estuary Management Division, Institute of Water Modelling,  
House-496, Road-32, New DOHS, Mohakhali, Dhaka-1206, Bangladesh 
3Director and Principal Specialist, Coast, Port & Estuary Management Division, Institute of Water Modelli
ng, House-496, Road-32, New DOHS, Mohakhali, Dhaka-1206, Bangladesh 
1282 
 
Mangrove afforestation was assessed as an adaptive measure in the study since its roots and 
trunks system can dissipate energy of cyclonic storm surge. It has been found that 600m width of 
Mangrove can reduce surge height by 50cm whereas it reduces current speed to one-third. Impact 
of upstream flow on salinity intrusion has also been assessed in the study and it has been found 
that a 200m3/s increase of flow in the Gorai river will push the 1ppt saline 45km towards sea.  
Crest level of coastal polders needs to be raised according to the water level from model 
simulation. There are 2500 cyclone shelters in the coastal area of Bangladesh but it needs 
redesigning considering SLR and increase of wind speed of cyclonic storm surge. 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Bangladesh is one of the most densely populated countries in the world where 28 percent of the 
population living in the coastal area (PDO-ICZMP 2004) is victim of frequent natural calamities 
like tropical cyclones, tornadoes, floods, salinity intrusion, storm surges and droughts. Now Sea 
level rise (SLR) due to climate change has imposed new threat to these natural calamities. The 
low-lying topography, funnel shaped coast exposing the land to cyclones and tidal surges, 
seasonal flooding, widespread poverty, large population base, poor institutional development etc. 
have particularly made Bangladesh coastal zone vulnerable to climate change. According to the 
Synthesis Report of Copenhagen Summit on March 2009 maximum sea level rise (SLR) will be 
1±0.5m by 2100 and this is alarming for our low lying coastal area. Again the Bay of Bengal is 
one of the favourable areas for the generation of tropical cyclones. Devastating cyclones cross the 
Bangladesh coast almost every year. A cyclone in 1970 resulted in close to 300,000 deaths, and 
another, in 1991 led to the loss of 138,000 lives. Nevertheless, the potential for economic and 
infrastructural damage remains very significant. According to AR4 frequency and intensity of 
cyclonic storm will increase in the near future in the Bay of Bengal area. The life and livelihood 
of coastal dwellers are directly dependent on the natural resource bases of coastal ecosystems. 
Climate change induced rise in sea surface temperature, change in frequency and intensity of 
cyclone and sea level rise may aggravate the potential risks to coastal zones. The rise of sea level 
could result in loss of cultivable land due to inundation, salt water intrusion into coastal 
ecosystems and into groundwater system and loss of terrestrial and marine biodiversity.   
 
2.Coastal zone of Bangladesh 
 
The coast of Bangladesh is approximately 710 km long, as estimated by measuring the distance 
around the Bay of Bengal between Indian and Myanmar (Burma) borders. The landward distance 
of the delineated coastal zone from the shore is between 30 and 195 km whereas the exposed 
coast is between 37 and 57 km. The coastal zone is low-lying with 62% of the land have an 
elevation less than 3 mMSL and 86% less than 5 mMSL. There are nineteen districts in the 
coastal region and the districts are Bagerhat, Barguna, Barisal, Bhola, Chandpur, Chittagong, 
Cox’s Bazar, Feni, Gopalganj, Jessore, Jhalakati, Khulna, Lakshimpur, Narail, Noakhali, 
Patuakhali, Pirojpur, Satkhira and Shariatpur (PDOICZMP, 2003). There are 123 embanked 
polders, which were constructed in late sixties to protect the land from tidal and monsoon 
flooding, saline water intrusion and to increase the crop production. About 11,915 km2 in the 
coastal region is protected by these coastal polders. The coastal zone has several ecosystems that 
have important conservation value: mangrove, marine, estuary, islands, coral, sandy beaches 
which provides habitat for an abundance of plant species as well as an array of fish and wildlife. 
The world’s largest mangrove forest Sundarbans, is situated in the southwestern part having an 
1283 
 
area of 577,100 ha. In the Sundarbans, land level varies from 1m to 2m and flooded during high 
tides. There are many small and large islands like, Bhola, Sandwip, Hatia, Manpura etc. located 
in the coastal zone of Bangladesh. Most of the large islands are protected by coastal 
embankments. Unprotected land masses are the mud flats and subjected to tidal flooding during 
high tide. 
 
3.Scenario Selection 
 
Taking the greenhouse gas-emission scenarios IPCC has developed different sea level rise (SLR) 
scenario in their different assessment report. From the 2nd IPCC report, it is estimated that the 
global sea level rise for the year 2100 would be between 13 cm – 94 cm, from 3rd IPCC report  it 
would be 9cm – 88cm and from the 4th IPCC report it would be 18cm – 59cm. But in all their 
reports they didn’t consider Greenland ice melting.  Again according to the Synthesis Report of 
Copenhagen Summit on March 2009 maximum sea level rise (SLR) will be 1±0.5m by 2100. In 
the Copenhagen Summit report Greenland ice melting has been considered and based on this 
report, sea level rise scenarios have been selected for this study. To carry out the study 60cm SLR 
for the year 2050 and 120cm SLR for the year 2100 have been selected. According to 4th IPCC if 
temperature is increased by 2oC wind speed will be increased by 10% and if temperature is 
increased by 4oC wind speed will be increased by 20%. For this study 10% increase has been 
considered for the year 2050. 
 
4.Selection of Severe Cyclone and Cyclone Track 
 
Bangladesh, due to its unique geographic location, suffers from devastating tropical cyclones 
frequently. The funnel-shaped northern portion of the Bay of Bengal causes tidal bores when 
cyclones make landfall, and thousands of people living in the coastal areas are affected. During 
the period 1960-2009, 19 cyclones hit Bangladesh coast. Among them 1970, 1991 and 2007 
SIDR were more devastating and SIDR had the highest wind speed compared to other cyclones 
that hit Bangladesh coast. In this study SIDR has been selected for further analysis as it was the 
most devastating cyclone ever in the coast of Bangladesh. The aim of the study is to analyze the 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Selected cyclone tracks 
1284 
 
impact of SIDR on the whole coastal area. To assess the impact of SIDR on the whole coastal 
area 5(five) different tracks have been selected in such a way that wind field of these cyclones 
cover the whole coastal area (Figure 1). Wind and pressure filed of SIDR have been imposed on 
these selected tracks and simulated to assess the impact of SIDR on the whole coastal area.   
 
5.Models Used in the Study 
 
The mathematical modelling is used to investigate the impacts of relative sea-level rise (resulting 
from global climate change, changes in river-flow and coastal development) on salinity intrusion 
and storm surge inundation.  
 
The river network in the deltaic southwest is very complex and characterized by many channels 
and loops with small water level differences within the area. The flow pattern is dominated not 
only by the upstream flow conditions in the major rivers but also to a very large degree by 
backwater and tidal effects propagating in east-west as well as north-south directions. The eastern 
hill region is dominated by flash flood from upstream and tidal influence in the downstream part. 
The lower Meghna Estuary is highly influenced by tidal interactions and huge combined flow of 
Ganges-Jamuna-Meghna and consequential backwater effect. In order to meet the demand for 
different combination of impact to be modelled, e.g. flooding pattern, salinity intrusion, cyclone; 
mathematical model developed for the river and bay of southwest region, eastern hill region and 
Bay of Bengal has been applied.  
 
The southwest region model (SWRM) is a complex network of tidal and non-tidal river systems, 
which covers the entire southwest part of Bangladesh. This model contains 189 river branches, 
polders and regulators. The model area is bounded on the north by the Ganges and the Padma 
river, on the east by the Lower Meghna river and Shahabazpur channel, on the west by the Indian 
border and on the south by the Bay of Bengal. Major river in the south west region are Upper 
Meghna, Lower Meghna, Arial Khan, Gorai, Pussur, Sibsa, Baleswer, Tentulia etc.  
 
The eastern hilly region model (EHRM) actually consists of four river basins, which are not 
hydraulically connected and these are Karnafuli-Halda, Sangu, Matamuhuri and Muhuri-Feni. 
The four river systems separately drain into the Bay of Bengal.  
Bay of Bengal model comprises of the northern region of the Bay of Bengal with the coastal belt 
of Bangladesh and part of India and Myanmar, extended up to160 latitude. The model has a wide, 
deep, open ocean boundary in the south situated along the line extending from the Coast of Orissa 
in India to the Coast of Arakan in Myanmar. Predictions on water levels have been made for the 
two extreme points along this boundary, i.e. Vishakhapatnam in India and Gwa Bay in Myanmar, 
respectively. The water level along the open boundary is obtained by interpolating the two 
predicted water levels. To the north the model has a narrow, shallow, open boundary in the 
Meghna River at Chandpur.  
 
The two-dimensional model of the northern Bay of Bengal and Meghna Estuary and the one-
dimensional models for the rivers in the coastal area have been used to assess the sea level rise 
impact for the study. The Bay of Bengal model has been used to generate the downstream 
boundary of the river models for base condition whereas the propagation of tide in the rivers and 
flood plain are modelled using river model.  
 
1285 
 
A numerical 2-dimensional and 1-dimensional model namely MIKE21 and MIKE11 are 
developed by DHI Water & Environment, have been used for simulation in this study. The hydro-
meteorological characteristics and its contribution to the catchments of the southwest and eastern 
hilly region have been generated using the Rainfall Runoff Model (NAM), a module of MIKE 11. 
 
The governing equations used in MIKE21 in solving hydraulic problems in coastal areas are: 
 
Conservation of Mass Equation 
 
0








y
q
x
p
t
    
Conservation of momentum equation 
 
The momentum equation in the x-direction is given by: 
 
 
 
The momentum equation in the y-direction is given by: 
 
012
22
2
2




















y
aphyWWwCapx
hyxq
h
qpf
y
gh
x
h
pq
y
h
q
t
q



  
 
Where,  
p and q  flux in x and y directions respectively (m3/s/m). 
 t  time (s), x and y (m) are Cartesian  Co –ordinate (s).  
h   = water depth (m).  
g   = acceleration due to gravity (9.81 m2/s)   
   = sea surface elevation (m).  
 w &  a  = air and water density respectively (kg /m3),  
Cw        = wind friction factor = 0.0008 + 0.000065W in accordance with  
          Wu (1982).  
W    =wind speed (m/s). 
    =Coriolis parameter =5.2*10-5 s-1 in the Bay of Bengal.  
Pa       =atmospheric pressure (kg/m/s2). 
 
This study was carried out in regional scale and has limitations. The models characterize a fixed 
representation based on land elevation. They do not consider land subsidence, erosion, accretion. 
Despite the limitations, the models illustrate the position of land areas susceptible to SLR and 
allow for reliable characterizations of the potential impacts on Bangladesh. 
 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
012
22
2
2



















x
aphxWWwCaqy
hxyp
h
qpf
x
gh
y
h
pq
x
h
p
t
p




1286 
 
6. Physical Impact of Climate Change and Cyclonic Storm Surge  
 
6.1. Impact of sea level rise and cyclonic storm surge on the coastal polders 
 
Sea level rise and potentially higher storm surge would result in over-topping of saline water 
behind the embankments of the polders. In other word, climate change will be double trouble for 
coastal flooding, particularly in the areas that are currently protected by embankments and 
therefore highly valued and home to productive economic activity. Modelling result for the last 
18 cyclones from 1960 to 2007 shows that 63 polders (protected area embanked all around) were 
overtopped due to cyclonic storm surge. Again due to climate change if selected 5 tracks (Figure 
1) come along with 60cm sea level rise and 10% increase of wind speed 103 polders may cause 
inundation due to overtopping of the embankments.  
 
 
Figure 2: Overtopped polder due to cyclonic storm surge 
 
 
6.2. Impact of sea level rise and cyclonic storm surge on inundation 
 
One of the potential impacts of sea level rise and cyclonic storm surge along Bangladesh coast 
provide information about the land which could be inundated and the population that would be 
affected provided no adaptive/protective measures are taken. In 1993 under Multi-purpose 
Cyclone Shelter project  (MSCP) an analysis was carried out to calculate the inundated area due 
to past 14 cyclones and it was found that 765,952 ha area was inundated due to cyclonic storm 
surge. In the present study another analysis has been carried out to calculate the inundated area 
due to past 18 cyclones from 1960 to 2007 and it has been found that 2,087,607 ha area was 
inundated due to these 18 cyclones which 173% higher than the study of MCSP. Again due to 
climate change if the selected 5 tracks (Figure 1) come along with 60cm sea level rise and 10% 
increase of wind speed 2,447,653 ha may be inundated and this is 220% higher than the study of 
MCSP study (Table 1).   
 
 
 
1287 
 
Table 1: Comparison of inundated area from different study due to cyclonic storm surge 
 
Inundation  
Depth (m) 
MCSP (1993) Past Cyclone (1960 – 2009) Climate Change Condition 
(2050) 
Inundated 
Area (ha) 
% increase Inundated 
Area (ha) 
% increase 
<1 meter 353,741 163,255 - 269,326 - 
>= 1 meter 765,952 2,087,607 173% 2,447,653 220 
 
 
6.3. Impact of sea level rise on salinity 
 
The impact on salinity in the Southwest region both in terms of its level and landward intrusion 
due to different sea level rise scenarios has been assessed using existing Bay of Bengal and South 
West Regional salinity models. This is because southwest region is more vulnerable to salinity 
intrusion due to gradual decrease of upstream flow. Again sea level rise would increase the extent 
of saline water intrusion by pushing the saline water front more landwards. Form the model result, 
it is found that 5 ppt salinity line moves towards upstream by 55km due to 60cm SLR and 95 km 
due to 120cm SLR mainly in the central part (through Baleswar-Buriswar rivers) during dry 
season.  However, the freshwater pocket in the Tentulia river is affected remarkably during dry 
season due to sea level rise. The Sundarbans, which is already experiencing high salinity, will be 
affected more by salinity water intrusion due to increased sea level both in dry and monsoon 
season. 
 
Again impact of salinity intrusion in the eastern hilly region has also been assessed using Eastern 
Hilly Regional salinity model and Bay of Bengal salinity model. Halda river is the only natural 
spawning ground for Indian carps in Bangladesh and it needs saline free water for natural 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3: Movement of 5ppt saline line due to different SLR 
1288 
 
breeding. Again drinking water of Chittagong city, the second largest city and port city, is 
collected from this Halda river. If sea level will rise by 120cm, salinity level at Mohra in Halda 
river will increase up to 2.5ppt from 0.5ppt which is not suitable natural breeding and drinking 
water (Figure 4).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4: Increase in salinity level at Mohra in Halda river due to 120 SLR 
 
7. Adaptation Options 
 
7.1 Afforestation 
 
Mangrove forest functions as natural physical barrier against tidal and ocean influences by means 
of their large above-ground aerial root systems and standing crop. Mangroves act to trap and 
stabilize sediment and reduce the risk of shoreline erosion. Mangroves also reduce the wave 
height due to their ability to dissipate wave energy. The World Conservation Union (IUCN) 
compared the death toll from two villages in Sri Lanka that were hit by the devastating Tsunami 
2004. Two people died in the settlement with dense mangroves, while up to 6,000 people died in 
village without similar vegetation.  
 
The study shows that the mangrove forest with width of 600m decreases the surge height of 
approximately 0.5m at the east side of Sandwip. From the model result results it has also been 
      
Table 2: Change in current speed due to     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Width of Mangrove Current Speed (m/s) 
Reduction in Current 
Speed (m/s) 
Without Mangrove 1.83 - 
200m 0.81 1.02 
400m 0.80 1.02 
600m 0.70 1.13 
1289 
 
found that 600m width mangrove reduces the current speed to one third which reduces the 
probability of embankment breaching. Table 2 shows the reduction in current speed due to 
different width of mangrove.  
 
It is evident from AR4 that frequency and intensity cyclonic storm surge will increase                                       
in the near future and that will be hazardous for our coastal people. In that case mangrove 
afforestation around our coastal area will be better solution.   
 
7.2 Cyclone shelters 
 
Recent history proven the effectiveness of killas (raised earthen mount) and cyclone shelters as 
safe haven during the cyclone induced storm surges. We have now 2500 cyclone shelters in the 
coastal area but that were constructed twenty years back. It is expected that the high risk zone due 
to cyclonic storm will expand in the near future due to climate change and this will create more 
population and property exposed to the cyclone induced hazards. To address this, more cyclone 
shelters and killas will be required. Again the height of cyclone shelter is not enough to resist the 
surge height if climate change takes place. A sample example in Kutubdia island is shown in the 
Figure 5.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5: Vulnerability of the height of cyclone shelter due to climate change 
 
7.3 Raising of coastal embankment 
 
In the early sixties and seventies 123 polders (protected area embanked all around), of which 49 
polders are sea facing, were constructed to protect low lying coastal areas against tidal flood and 
salinity intrusion. Crest levels of these polders were designed using historic water level analysis 
without considering cyclonic storm surge and any probable sea level rise in future. Present study 
found that 63 polders were over topped due to last 18 severe cyclones and 106 polders will be 
over topped due to 60 cm SLR and 10% increased of wind speed. A sample calculation has been 
done for the Kutubdia island and has been shown in the Figure 6. It has been found that crest 
level needs to raised by 4.3m to protect the island from climate induced cyclonic storm surge. 
The drainage will be slower because of higher rainfall and higher downstream water levels. This 
could be partially addressed by increasing the sluice openings (number of vents).   
 
1290 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6: Vulnerability of the height of coastal embankment in Kutubdia island 
 
7.4 Increase of fresh water flow in the upstream rivers 
 
Saline water intrusion is highly seasonal in Bangladesh and during dry season deep landwards 
intrusion occurs through the various inlets in the western part of the delta, and through the Lower 
Meghna estuary. Southwest part of our coastal area is the most affected area as upstream flow 
from Gorai and Mathabhanga river reduces day by day. To reduce the threats of increasing 
salinity, particularly during low flow period, increase in freshwater flow through upstream river 
specifically through Gorai or Mathabhanga river is one the physical adaptations to offset salinity 
ingress. The study recommended that fresh water should allowed to flow through Gorai or 
Mathabhanga river system, particularly during critical dry period of April. The increase of 
freshwater flow through Gorai or Mathabhanga could be achieved by diversion from Ganges 
Barrage or through dredging of Gorai and Mathabhanga offtake. In this study different options 
have been developed considering Gorai river and furnished in the Table 3.   
 
Table 3: Different adaptive options to resist the salinity intrusion in the southwest region 
 
Adaptive Options Findings 
Option 1: Minimum discharge at Gorai is 100  
m3/s without changing other existing condition.  
The boundary of salinity zone (min 1ppt.) is 
shifted from Baradia towards Khulna by 25km. 
Option 2: Minimum discharge at Gorai is 200  
m3/s without changing other existing condition. 
The boundary of salinity zone (min 1ppt.) is 
shifted from Baradia towards Khulna by 45km. 
Option 3: Minimum discharge at Gorai is 200  
m3/s  and at Kobadah-Betna system is 200 
m3/s  
Significant improvement on the upstream of 
the eastern part of the Sundarbans is observed 
but not much improvement with respect to 
option 2 in the Sundarbans area. 
 
8. Conclusions 
 
Climate change and sea level rise will continue to affect Bangladesh coast through permanent 
inundation, drainage congestion in the polders, increased salinity intrusion of low-lying areas and 
increased intensity and frequency of cyclonic storm. This will impact on food security, coastal 
livelihood, coastal infrastructure and the bio-diversity of coastal area significantly. It is the high 
time to revisit the planning and design of existing coastal infrastructure and to rehabilitate these 
structures to make it climate resilient. The risk of climate change, sea level rise and cyclonic 
1291 
 
storm surge are to be considered for future planning and design of coastal structure. Proper 
adaptation measures both structural and non-structural are to be planned immediately in order to 
ensure a sustainable climate resilient coastal environment for food security and livelihood 
security. This paper discussed the severe impact of climate change especially sea level rise on 
salinity intrusion and cyclonic storm surge.   The Impact assessment has been made on the basis 
of existing literature and models. But still there remain some uncertainties such as limitations of 
models, the lack of full understanding of the climatic parameters and their variation, etc. The 
assessment results need to be updated continuously and hence more in-depth research efforts 
should be put into this.  
 
Acknowledgements 
 
The authors express their gratitude to Institute of Water Modelling (IWM) for the support to use 
their study findings in the paper. 
 
References 
 
Solomon, S., D. Qin, M. Manning, Z. Chen, M. Marquis, K.B. Averyt, M. Tignor and H.L. Miller, 
Climate Change 2007: Working Group I: The Physical Basis, (Chapter 10, Chapter 11 and 
Technical Summary), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New 
York, NY, USA, 2007. 
Institute of Water Modelling (IWM), Impact Assessment of Climate Change and Sea Level Rise 
on Monsoon Flooding, Climate Change Cell, Department of Environment, 2008 
IWM and CEGIS,Investigating the Impact of Relative Sea-Level Rise on Coastal Communities    
and their Livelihoods in Bangladesh, UK Department for Environment Food and Rural 
Affairs, 2007. 
IWM,“Impact Assessment of Climate Change zone of Bangladesh, Water Resource Planning 
Organization, Government of Bangladesh, 2005. 
Jakobsen, F., Azam, M.H., Ahmed, M.M.Z. and Kabir, M.M., Cyclone storm surge levels along 
the Bangladeshi coastline in 1876 and 1960-2000, Coastal Engineering Journal, Volume 48, 
No. 3 , pp 295 – 307,  2006.  
Kabir, M.M., Ahmed M.M.Z., Azam, M.H. and  Jacobsen F., Effect of afforestation on storm 
surge propagation- A mathematical model study, International conference in Ocean 
Engineering-2001 (December 10-14, 2001), IIT Madras, Chennai India, Page 655-661, 
volume-II of proceedings, 2001. 
PDO-ICZMP, Living in the Coast People and Livelihood, Water Resource Planning organization, 
2003. 
 
 
 
1292 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
A STUDY ON EROSION AND DEPOSITION PROBLEM ON PATURIA-DAULATDIA 
REACH OF PADMA RIVER IN BANGLADESH 
 
 
M. Monowar Hossain1, Muhaiminul Islam Fahmi2 and Md. Mizanur Rahman 3 
 
 
ABSTRACT: The river reach below the confluence of Ganges-Brahmaputra at Aricha upto the 
confluence with upper Meghna at Chandpur is known as the Padma River in Bangladesh. The 
Padma River carries the combined discharge and sediment load of the Ganges and the 
Brahmaputra to the Bay of Bengal through the lower Meghna estuary. The morphology of this 
large alluvial river has changed in the last century, due to the geological, topographical and 
climatologically conditions, as well as due to the human intervention along its upper reaches. In 
this study besides confluence shifting, a 10 km long river reach from the Aricha confluence to the 
downstream has been considered to critically examine amount of erosion and deposition volume. 
For this purpose, geo-referenced satellite images of six distinct years from 1984 to 2010 were 
digitized with Arc view GIS 3.3. Bathymetry data of the year 2008 and 2010 were analyzed and 
the volume of erosion and deposition were computed. Discharge, Water Level, Cross section Area, 
Sediment Discharge and Maximum Velocity Data have been analyzed. A number of graphs 
relating to the above parameters have been prepared to develop useful correlations. The study 
shows that total volume of deposition and erosion within the selected reach is 74204962 m3 and 
44289754 m3 respectively from March 2008 to March 2010 indicating a huge sedimentation in 
the study reach. Confluence movement, bankline migration, thalweg shifting, change in width etc. 
have been determined. It is observed that confluence point has moved to downstream 
considerably over the thirty seven years period. The study showed that left bank (Paturia) is more 
stable but the right bank (Daulatdia) is more susceptible to erosion because of soil condition. The 
study further showed that near Paturia thalweg has moved towards west by a significant value. 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Every year, Bangladesh Inland Water Transport Authority (BIWTA) has to carry out a dredging 
work for about 1.0 to 1.5 million cubic meters of riverbed in the Jamuna and Padma to maintain 
navigation routes. It has been observed that even during the late monsoon dredging becomes 
crucial for continuing ferry services and maintaining the perennial navigation route not only 
Paturia-Daulatdia but also upto the Baghabari river port. On the other hand, rapid changes in the 
riverbed during the recession of floods often create problems for running the dredging work 
smoothly. In some cases, it has been observed that the estimated dredging increases significantly 
                                                        
1Professor, BUET & Executive Director, Institute of Water Modeling Dhaka; mnh@iwmbd.org; monowar
@wre.buet.ac.bd   
2Assistant Engineer, Bangladesh Agricultural Development Corporation (BADC), fahmi1st@yahoo.com  
3PG Student, Water Resources Engineering Dept., BUET, mizan_05@yahoo.com  
1293 
 
 
Figure 1: Study area showing the confluence of Ganges-Brahmaputra and Padma River near 
Aricha 
 
due to re-sedimentation in the riverbed during dredging. Conversely, the estimated dredging 
decreases due to erosion in the riverbed along the dredging alignment. These observations 
suggest that the dredging amount does not only depend on the bathymetry of the riverbed during 
the end of monsoon, but also on the local morphological processes. Morological developments in 
the Padma and Jamuna, creates problems during dredging by BIWTA. In extreme cases, the 
problems lead to failure of dredging activities. This has been especially true in the Paturia-
Baghabari navigation route in recent years. The study area is shown in Fig. 1. 
 
2. Review  
 
Center for Environmental and Geographic Information Services (CEGIS) carried out a study for 
BIWTA in 2009 on “Optimizing Dredging in the Jamuna and Padma Rivers”. Based on the 
characteristics of morphology and navigation, their study area was divided into segments: (i) 
Paturia and Daulatdia ferry ghats, and (ii) Paturia and Baghabari navigation route.  The study 
discussed about the morphological processes of the Padma River, especially the dynamics of the 
confluence of the Jamuna and Ganges, based on time-series satellite images. The report 
accumulates several years images of Ganges-Jamuna confluence including Paturia-Daulatdia 
reach because of short-term planform development analysis. The Satellite images show that the 
confluence shifted downstream and came close to Paturia in 1998. The dry season width at the  
1294 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
              
Figure 2 Cross-sections in the study reach of the Padma River 
 
Paturia section was 1.6 km. In the following years the confluence shifted upstream again. Except 
for 2005, the narrowest width has remained at the Paturia section since 2004. In this study most 
recent data have been considered and a detail analysis considering all influencing parameters that 
contribute to erosion-deposition mechanism have been considered for the study reach. Studies by 
Hossain (1989, 1991, 1992a and Hossain 1992b) and others have shown that the confluence of 
the Ganges- Brahmaputra has always been very dynamic and shifting both at upstream and 
downstream have been observed over a period of about forty years Hossain and Rahman (1998). 
This mainly because of variation of discharge and charge of the two rivers the Ganges and is 
Brahmaputra-Jamuna. Mohammadi et al (2008) studied the morphological features of Iranian 
rivers using remote sensing technology. 
 
3. Data 
 
All relevant data and information on water level, discharge, bathymetry, satellite images, 
sediment transport related data, velocity data, cross-sectional data were collected from BIWTA, 
Bangladesh Water Development Board, CEGIS, and SPARRSO. Reports of Institute Water 
Modelling (IWM) were also consulted in this connection. The cross-section locations for study 
reach is shown in Fig. 2. 
 
4. Analysis 
 
4.1. Analysis from Satellite Images 
 
4.1.1. Shifting of Confluence 
In the early 1973s the Jamuna met as a single channel river with the Ganges (Fig. 3). Earlier 
studies have shown that the confluence was about 10 to 12 km northwest of Paturia. At the 
downstream of the confluence the river used to converge and subsequently inflated its width at 
1295 
 
 
Figure 3: Shifting of Aricha confluence of the Padma river from the year 1973 to 2006 
 
the immediate upstream of Paturia. Due to its cohesive bank materials the width of the river 
reduced in this location. The river reach was straight from the confluence to several kilometers 
downstream of Paturia at that time. 
 
The dry season width of the Paturia section in 1973 was 2.5 km. The Padma River widened again 
at the downstream of the long and narrow confluence reach, particularly at the downstream of 
Paturia. In 1984, the downstream reach of the Jamuna River spitted as a multi-channel river. The 
downstream reach of the Ganges turned towards the northeast direction and before meeting with 
the Jamuna River it turned to the southeast direction. Two flows of the Jamuna and the Ganges 
met about 10 km northwest of Paturia. The image showed that after a narrow reach at the 
confluence, there was a short and wide reach at the immediate upstream of Paturia. The Ganges 
flow shifted further south in 1994. There were two prominent confluences, one with the right 
anabranch of the Jamuna 6 km upstream of Paturia and the other was with the left anabranch of 
the Jamuna River 3 km upstream of Paturia. As a result, the minimum dry season width of the 
river was at the Paturia section, which was 1.7 km. The combined flow pushed at Paturia and an 
attached sand bar along the right bank made the section narrower. In the year 2000 and 2006 
because of high erosion in upstream of confluence, the confluence point moved in south-east 
direction. 
 
4.1.2. Bank lines movement 
The Fig. 4 shows the bank lines of Paturia-Daulatdia Reach at year 2000 and 2006 and the Fig. 5 
shows the bank lines of years 1973,1984,2000,2006 and Fig. 6 show the bank line at the year 
1984 and 2000. The left bank is Paturia and the right bank is Daulatdia reach. It shows that the 
bank line of right side (Daulatdia reach) is moving. But it is obvious that the left bank (Paturia 
reach) remains unchanged. It contains clayey soil which has high adhesive quality. So erosion 
occurs here quite hardly. But the soil of Daulatdia reach is very cohesive. The river bank of this 
1296 
 
side remains unstable. From the year 1984 the Daulatdia reach is eroding, changing its shape and 
pushing the confluence southeastward. As long as the confluences of the Ganges and the 
anabranches of the Jamuna are far away from Paturia, mid-channel bars were visible at the 
Paturia section. As the confluence approached Paturia, all mid-channel bars disappeared from this 
section. Since the confluence came very close to Paturria, the section became very narrow. The 
attached bars moving along the right bank of the Ganges and the left bank of the Jamuna 
narrowed the section. But due to deposition in some years, the confluence tried to come  
 
 
Figure 4 Bank of Paturia Daulatdia reach of Padma 
for year 2000 and 2006. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5 Bank of Paturia Daulatdia reach of Padma 
for the year 1973, 1984, 2000, 2006 
 
Figure 6 Bank of Paturia-Daulatdia reach of Padma river 
at the year 2000 and 1984 
1297 
 
northeastward again. For this reason the bank lines of year 1984 and year 2000 did not change 
much which may be seen in Fig. 6. 
 
4.1.3. Areas of siltation and erosion 
 
The area of water surface and total bars were calculated for individual years and is shown in table 
1. It may be observed from the table 1 that from 1984 to 1994 river surface area reduced while 
the bar area increased. Due to continuous siltation within this ten year bar growth increased on 
the river bed.  From 1994 to 2006 both the surface area of free water surface portion and bar 
portion enlarged. It seems that there occurred high bank line erosion, that’s why river surface area 
increased; simultaneously siltation occurred on river bed, that’s why bar developed. From 2006 to 
2010 bank line erosion continued but scouring affected on river bed level. The table also give an 
indication of dynamic and random nature of bar growth and decay. 
 
Table 1 Water surface and bar areas from satellite images of different years 
 
Year 1984 1994 2000 2006 2010 
Water Surface 
Area(m2) 
83675.522 66376.18 75454.492 80899.6 90784.45 
Total Bars Area (m2) 33567.714 39131.4 55361.729 63259.54 23438.65 
% of Bar on River 
surface 
40% 59% 73% 78% 25.8% 
 
4.2. Analysis from Bathymetry Data 
        
       4.2.1. Erosion-deposition volume 
Total 26 sections were considered as shown in Fig. 2 and the distance of the sections are almost 
equal. For each sections volume of erosion and deposition of the selected reach from the year 
2008 to 2010 were calculated with reference to a datum. Positive value indicated deposition while 
negative value indicated erosion. The erosion and deposition volume against each section were 
plotted and is shown in Figure 7. The blue color indicates deposition and the green color indicates 
erosion. The figure shows that from cross sections one to cross sections net deposition occurs 
almost in all cross sections from cross-sections 21 to 26. The detail computation is shown in Tab. 
2. 
 
4.2.2. Variation of cross sections 
Analysis of long term cross sections is the most dependable way of assessing the morphological 
status of the rivers. Due to the limitation of historical data the analysis is mostly based on the 
recent information. The study used only two year’s cross section data of 2008 and 2010. Though 
it is difficult to provide a conclusive assessment of the future morphological changes of the river 
with only few set of data, in general, the analysis shows gradual siltation of the river in most of 
1298 
 
the sections.  From the plot of a typical section XS_12 it is observed that at left bank erosion 
occur and at the mid channel deposition occurs (Fig. 8). 
 
 
Figure 7 Erosion-Deposition volumes in the study reach for the year 2008 and 2010 
Table 2 Erosion and Deposition volume of different cross sections 
Cross 
Section 
ID 
Deposition 
(m3) 
Erosion 
(m3) 
Net 
Erosion or 
Deposition 
Comment 
 
Left bank Right bank 
X Y X Y 
XS-
001 587125 35438 551688 Deposition 
478245 634153 475389 630019 
XS -
002 3372675 1743875 1628800 Deposition 
478386 633553 475961 630100 
XS -
003 3872550 1703550 2169000 Deposition 
478454 633039 476328 629951 
XS -
004 3537738 1596456 1941281 Deposition 
478760 632720 476752 629841 
XS -
005 1532705 1107925 424780 Deposition 
478931 632280 477135 629715 
XS -
006 2668950 519981 2148969 Deposition 
479243 631998 477493 629531 
XS -
007 3982050 1493700 2488350 Deposition 
479476 631619 477805 629317 
XS -
008 3570938 1000250 2570688 Deposition 
479757 631368 478160 629084 
XS -
009 2942750 1698950 1243800 Deposition 
480045 631141 478441 628821 
XS -
010 1731538 1295875 435663 Deposition 
480363 630817 478692 628454 
+Ve Deposition 
-Ve Erosion 
1299 
 
XS -
011 3047975 1818488 1229488 Deposition 
480663 630609 479035 628166 
XS -
012 2756050 1345275 1410775 Deposition 
481012 630303 479310 627915 
XS -
013 1966325 1156688 809638 Deposition 
481324 630033 479561 627585 
XS -
014 2324838 978313 1346525 Deposition 
481575 629782 479831 627279 
XS -
015 4447150 1286838 3160313 Deposition 
481863 629544 480100 626936 
XS -
016 3618075 583725 3034350 Deposition 
482065 629097 480327 626661 
XS -
017 3364138 907069 2457069 Deposition 
482432 628901 480663 626361 
XS -
018 8054838 3909650 4145188 Deposition 
482836 628778 481000 626153 
XS -
019 2545520 1610400 935120 Deposition 
478245 634153 481257 625828 
XS -
020 3144950 2549225 595725 Deposition 
478386 633553 481588 625528 
XS -
021 2582980 2836350 -253370 Erosion 
478454 633039 481838 625265 
XS -
022 2523920 2578470 -54550 Erosion 
478760 632720 482120 625020 
XS -
023 2314600 3478285 -1163685 Erosion 
478931 632280 482395 624702 
XS -
024 2275095 3231910 -956815 Erosion 
479243 631998 482689 624316 
XS -
025 1035420 2635630 -1600210 Erosion 
479476 631619 482879 623986 
XS -
026 404069 1187438 -783369 Erosion 
479757 631368 483461 624010 
 
Fig. 8 Typical cross section (XS_12) of Paturia-Daulatdia reach for the year 2008 to 2010  
1300 
 
4.2.3. Variation of thalweg profile 
In a river highly charged with sediment, the bed configuration changes drastically under different 
flow regimes. Deposition of sediment in one place cause deepening by scour in another places. 
Thus the thalweg tends to wander continuously from one position to another within the river bank 
lines. This can be visualized from the plot of thalweg of 2008 and 2010 for the study reach (Fig. 
9). Huge deposition is also visible from the comparison of two years thalweg. 
 
Figure 9 Change in thalweg elevation from 2008 to 2010 
 
Figure 10 Movement of thalweg from left bank from 2008 to 2010 
 
Paturia, XS-16 
Daulatdia, XS_11 
1301 
 
Lateral shifting of thalweg line is shown in Fig.10. This figure shows that at section XS_16, 
thalweg has been shifted to 470 meter from that of 2008 in 2010 which indicates that near Paturia 
ghat (Left bank of Padma ), navigable depth has been decreased considerably only within a 
period of two years. The analysis supports the real situation. 
 
4.3. Analysis using Discharge, Water Level, Sediment Discharge and Velocity Data 
 
4.3. 1. Hydrograph of Monthly Maximum Discharge 
Fig.11 and Fig. 12 show the discharge hydrographs of monthly maximum discharge for 10 year 
from 1984 to 2008. Fig. 11 include data for 1984, ’85, ’87, ’88 and ’90 while Fig. 12 includes 
data of 1990, ’95, ’98, 2000, 2004 and 2008. The discharge hydrographs show a trend of rise 
from May to October which is usual for Himalayan rivers in the GBM basins. The transboundary 
flow coupled with local runoff from rainfall makes this sharp rise of the peaks. The great floods 
in 1988 and in 1998 reflect the very high peaks of about 130,000 m3/s of discharge in the Padma 
River as the peaks in the Ganges and Jamuna was almost simultaneous. It is reported that in 1987 
India sprayed excess coal dust over the Himalayas to fight against drought. Enormous melting of 
snow coupled with rainfall caused floods in India as well as in Bangladesh. The main flows come 
from Jamuna and flows through Padma and lower Meghna. So there exist a high peak in July to 
August, as long flood exist. And in 1988 Bangladesh faced more severe flood than 1987, but for a 
short period of 15 days. So the peak looks so sharp with a discharge of around 130000 cumec. 
Notable flood also occurred on 1998 and 2004. The flood of1998 flood had a longer duration, 
about 70 days causing great sufferings for the people of the region. As already mentioned the 
combined rainfall over all the 3 river basins and huge sediment load of the basin from the upper 
catchment located in India, Bhutan and Nepal resulted severe flood in Bangladesh as well as 
made the sedimentation problem worse.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11 Hydrograph of monthly maximum 
discharge from 1984 to 1990 at Baruria transit of 
Padma River. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 12 Hydrograph of monthly maximum 
discharge from 1990 to 2008 at Baruria transit of 
Padma River. 
1302 
 
 
4.3.2. Hydrograph of Monthly Maximum Water Level 
Water level of a river is directly related with river discharge and drainage facility. Those curves of 
discharge show high peak for flood, for water level these curves also appear high peaks. Typical 
water level hydrographs for the river Padma at Baruria is shown in Fig. 13 and 14. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 13 Hydrograph of monthly maximum 
Water Level from 1984 to 1996 
 
 
Figure 14 Hydrograph of monthly maximum 
water level from 1996 to 2008 
 
4.3.3. Variation of Maximum Water Level and Discharge 
It is normal phenomena that discharge and water level increase or decrease simultaneously. The 
variation of maximum water level in the study reach is illustrated in Fig. 15 for the study period. 
From 1984 to 1986 both maximum water level and maximum discharge decreased. But during 
the period 1988 maximum discharge increased excessively rather than maximum water level. 
This phenomenon is also observed in the year 1998. In 1988 and 1998 severe flood engulfed the 
country. In 1998 due to presence of high tides in the Bay of Bengal drainage congestion took  
 
 
Figure 15 Variation of maximum WL and maximum Discharge at the Baruria transit station 
1303 
 
longer time to drain out the flood water to the Bay. However, because of the statistical 
randomness there is no general trend of rise or fall in the maximum water level or discharge over 
the last 25 years. But low flows show remarkable variations due to upstream withdrawal to meet 
dry weather demands. 
 
4.3.4. Deviation in Maximum WL from Average WL 
An unbalanced deviation of maximum water level from average water level is observed at Padma 
River from 1984 to 2009, and an abnormal deviation is found during the flood period of 1988 and 
1998 from Fig. 16. During 1988, 1998 and 2007 maximum deviation of water level was found as 
1.2 meter, 1.15 meter and 1.4 meter respectively. Recent past 8 years from 2002 to 2009 is 
showing the greater fluctuation of maximum water level deviation. Standard deviation of 
maximum water level from average maximum water level is 0.54 meter for last 26 year.  
 
 
 
Fig. 16 Deviation of maximum water level from average water level 
 
4.3.5. Sediment Rating Curves 
Sediment rating curves relating the water discharge and sediment discharge for Baruria station 
have been plotted. If the bed material discharge is understood to be identical with the sediment 
discharge of an alluvial stream, the two are functionally related, and a reasonable correlation may 
be expected (Graf 1984). Discharge vs. Sediment discharge curves of the year 1995 and 2000 is 
shown in Fig. 17.  It is observed that for year 1995, the data plot trend line maintains linear 
equation having correlation factor 0.8 and for the year 2000, the data plot trend line maintains 
power series equation having correlation factor 0.90. This indicates that there apparently does not 
exist of a simple relationship between sediment discharge and stream discharge. Sediment 
discharge vs. maximum velocity curves have also been plotted for the year 1995 and 2010 and 
are shown in Fig.18. This in fact an scatter plot and need adjustment for any use. 
 
 
1304 
 
 
 
 
Figure 17 Water discharge vs. sediment discharge curve of Padma River at Baruria transit   
 
Figure 18 Sediment discharge vs. Maximum velocity graph of Padma River at Baruria transit 
 
4.3.6 Sediment Discharge and Hydrographs 
Sediment transport data were analyzed and plotted over the hydrological year. Typical plotting for 
the year 1995 and 2000 are shown in Fig. 19 and 20 respectively. Corresponding discharge 
hydrographs are also shown on the plots. From these figures it is apparent that the sediment load 
at flood stage is larger than at moderate or low flows and has clear concordance with the 
discharge hydrographs. The figures also demonstrate that sediment discharge and water discharge 
do not always increase or decrease exactly simultaneously but has very small phase lag which is 
usual for the case of large alluvial rivers like the Ganges and Jamuna (Hossain 1991, 1992). 
 
Sediment yield from the river basin and its transport in the river phase does not, necessarily, 
coincide with occurrence of maximum flow rates. For large alluvial river this is truer depending 
on the hydrologic system of the watershed (Graf 1984, van Rijn 1993).  
 
4.3.7 Relation between Discharge and Cross Section Area 
Discharge against cross section area curves have been plotted for the year 1984 to 2008 for the 
station at Baruria transit of Padma river. It is observed that best fit curve maintain logarithmic 
1305 
 
  
Figure 19 Discharge and Sediment discharge 
hydrographs at the Baruria Transit station of the 
Padma River for 1995 
Figure 20 Discharge and Sediment discharge 
hydrographs at the Baruria Transit station of the 
Padma river for the year 2000 
 
 
 
Figure 21 Correlation between Discharge and Cross section area at Baruria transit  
 
equations having correlation coefficient more than 0.9 except for some years. It indicates that 
there exist strong relationships between discharge and cross section area. A typical discharge vs. 
cross section area curve for the year 1995 is shown below in Fig. 21. 
 
4.3.8 Change in River Width 
The morphological instability is better visualized from the plot of Fig. 22 which shows that the 
river width of different years at Baruria transit changes over the period of 25 years. The 
maximum, average and minimum width is found to have significantly decreasing trend during 
this period. Critical examination of the figure reveals that that there is a maximum decrease of 
about 1.8 km and minimum 0.9 km of river width within 25 years. From 1984 to 1986 the  
1306 
 
 
Figure 22 Change in river width at Baruria transit station from 1984 to 2008 
 
average width had been decreased by 0.5 km and restored again within next two years. This 
fluctuation was found to continue till 1994. Within the study period, the width reduction appeared 
to have erratic fluctuations.  
 
5. Discussion 
 
From above study it is clear that the study area Paturia-Daulatdia Reach is mainly affected by 
deposition problem rather than erosion. Deposition in one place means erosion in other. It 
depends on the sediment carrying capacity of the river. High sediment discharge comes from 
Jamuna River. At the confluence the combined flow of Jamuna and Ganges reduces its velocity. 
High flow velocity helps the water to carry and convey sediment. But due to reduction of flows, 
the stream power gets reduced and the flow looses the ability to carry sediment load. As a result 
the sediment is silted up causing deposition at the first 7 to 8 km and later the velocity slightly 
increases and erosion occurs due to increase of slope. About the bank erosion it is found left bank 
(Paturia side) is relatively more stable than right bank (Daulatdia side) because the soil of left 
bank is cohesive. Bank erosion occurs mainly on right bank, where soil type is not so cohesive. 
 
From the analysis and critical examination of various parameters responsible for erosion and 
deposition processes, it appears that there are two phenomena. Firstly, for the case of pre-
monsoon period, when water level of Padma River is very low, at around 2 meter (PWD), 
siltation occurs. Secondly, in the case of monsoon period, water level as well as discharge is 
augmented and high, it can carry a huge quantity of sediment. The average discharge and water 
level during monsoon period becomes 60000 cumec and 8 m (PWD) respectively. This flow 
carries a sediment discharge of around 25000 kg/s, whereas during pre-monsoon period this 
discharge is very low and can carry about only around 2300 kg/s. As a result large volume of 
sediment is naturally deposited on the river bed. It is found from study that as discharge increases, 
1307 
 
cross sectional area increases and that there is a functional correlation. Rising of bed level also 
affects navigability even preceding monsoon and also in post-monsoon because of lower river 
stream power and huge sediment deposition. 
 
6. Conclusion  
 
The study revealed that the confluence point is moving southeastward from northwest including 
some fluctuation. The largest displacement in left bank is observed between 1973 and 1984. 
Confluence shifted by about 8200 meter eastward and 3200 meter southward. From 1973 to 2010 
the overall displacement of confluence is about 5800 meter eastward and 5350 meter southward. 
In the case of right bank maximum shifting exists between 1973 and 2006. The study revealed 
that left bank of Padma River is more stable compared to right bank. Water surface area was 
found to decrease while the bar area increased indicating more sedimentation over the 25 year 
study period.  Analysis of bathymetry data around confluence revealed that from 2008 to 2010 
total volume of deposition is 74204962 m3 and total volume of erosion is 44289754 m3 indicating 
dominant deposition. But at the downstream of Paturia-Daulatdia reach erosion slightly 
dominates. Deep channel was found to wander erratically causing difficulty in ferry operation. 
Few useful correlation have developed between sediment discharge and stream discharge, 
sediment discharge and maximum velocity and discharge against cross-sectional area which may 
be used effectively for design purposes specific to the study area and for sustainability of  
navigability of the Daulatdia-Paturia ferry route. 
 
References 
 
   CEGIS,(2009). Optimizing Dredging in the Jamuna and Padma Rivers; Final report prepared for 
BIWTA, Government of Bangladesh 
Graf W. H. (1984). Hydraulics of Sediment Transport, Water Resources Publication, Chapter-9 
   Hossain, M.M., "Geomorphic Characteristics of the Ganges (Padma) upto Brahmaputra 
confluence" Final Report, R 02/89, IFCDR, BUET, pp. 158, July, 1989 
   Hossain, M.M. (1991). "Problem of erosion and deposition in the major rivers of Bangladesh", 
Proceedings of International Symposium on Special Problems of Allvial Rivers including those 
of International Rivers, Seoul, Korea, pp. 247-255, Sept. 16-19 
   Hossain,M.M. (1992a)"Instability of the Ganges-Jamuna confluence" Water Nepal, Vol. 3, No. 
1(24), Nepal, July, 1992. 
   Hossain, M.M.(1992b) "Total sediment load in the lower Ganges and Jamuna", Journal of the IEB, 
Vol. 20, No. 1&2, pp. 1-8, January   
   Hossain, M. M. & Rahman, M. L. (1998): Sediment transport functions and their evaluation using 
data from large alluvial rivers of Bangladesh. In: Proc. Sediment Symposium. Vienna. IAHSpub. 
No.249, pp. 376-379 
   Mohammadi, A. Alaghmand, S. and  Mosaedi, A. (2008): Study and determination of 
morphological changes of Dough river in north Iran using GIS; The International Archives of the 
Photogrammetric, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences; Vol. XXXVII. Part B8. 
Beijing 
   Van Rijn, L.C., 1993. Principles of Sediment Transport in Rivers, Estuaries and Coastal Seas; 
Delft Hydraulics, the Netherlands; Aqua publications. 
 
1308 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
METHODOLOGY FOR FORMULATION OF EQUIVALENT STEEL SECTION FOR 
PARTIALLY ENCASED COMPOSITE COLUMN WITH VERIFICATION 
 
 
Debaroti Ghosh1 and Dr. Mahbua Begum2 
 
 
ABSTRACT: Partially encased composite column (PEC) consists of thin walled welded H- 
shaped steel section with transverse links provided at regular intervals between the flanges to 
inhibit the occurrence of local buckling in the thin flange plates. The space between the flanges 
and the web plate are filled up with concrete. Extensive experimental investigations have been 
conducted by several research groups to understand the behavior of this relatively new composite 
column under both concentric and eccentric loading conditions along with sophisticated non-
linear finite element analysis. But the separation between concrete and steel initiates the unstable 
condition in the finite element analysis near the ultimate point when flange plate buckles. To 
avoid the expensive and cumbersome modeling of the behavior at the interface of two dissimilar 
materials, an attempt has been made in this study to replace the composite section of PEC column 
with an equivalent steel section which can easily be incorporated in commercially available finite 
element software.  
 
 
1. Background 
 
Steel-concrete composite columns can substantially improve the behaviour and cost efficiency of 
steel-only columns used in the construction of mid-rise and high-rise buildings.  A welded H- 
shaped steel section figures the partially encased composite (PEC) section with concrete infill 
between the flanges which is shown in Figure 1. In Europe, in the early 1980s, PEC columns and 
beams were introduced using standard-sized rolled steel sections. In 1996, the Canam Group in 
North America proposed a PEC column section constructed from a thin–walled built–up steel 
shape with transverse links provided at regular intervals to restrain local buckling as shown in 
Figure 1. Extensive experimental research has been performed in Ecole Polytechnique de 
Montréal (Trembley et al, 1998; Chicoine et al, 2002; Bouchereau, 2003) on small-scale and 
large-scale PEC column specimens under various conditions of loading. The influences of high 
performance materials on the behavior of these columns have also been investigated experimental 
by Prickett and Driver (2006) at the University of Alberta. The results of these experimental 
investigations indicated that the behavior of this composite column is significantly affected by the 
local instability of the thin steel flanges. Begum et al. (2007) were able to overcome these   
                                                        
1Graduate Student, Department of Civil Engineering, BUET, Dhaka, Bangladesh, 
debaroti.ghosh.bd@gmail.com   
2Associate Professor,Department of Civil Engineering, BUET, Dhaka, Bangladesh. mahbuba@ce.buet.ac.
bd 
1309 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1 Partially Encased Composite Column with Thin-Walled Built-Up Steel Section, (a) 
Column Cross-Section and (b) 3D view of the Steel Configuration 
 
challenges in the finite element model through the implementation of a dynamic explicit 
formulation along with a damage plasticity model for concrete and a contact pair algorithm at the 
steel-concrete interface. The developed model was applied successfully to reproduce the 
behaviour of 34 PEC columns from five experimental programs. However, despite of the 
accuracy, the composite finite element model developed by Begum et al. (2007) is very 
sophisticated due to the presence of two dissimilar materials. Moreover, modelling of the 
interfacial behaviour between steel and concrete requires extensive calculations as well as skilled 
and experienced users. Due to these complexities most of the structural analysis and design 
software do not handle such composite members. In this paper an attempt has been made to 
develop a fictitious steel section of the partially encased composite steel section. This equivalent 
steel section has added a new dimension to the analysis of partially encased composite column 
renovating the numerical procedure.  
 
 
2. Objectives and Scopes 
 
The main objective of this study is to formulate the methodology for the development of fictitious 
steel section for partially encased composite column built up with thin steel plates. The 
methodology is then used to simulate ten test PEC test columns from the published literature with 
variety of geometric properties subjected to concentric gravity loading only. The formulation of 
the fictitious steel section is based on the equivalence criteria of the basic geometric properties of 
the composite column. Linear elastic material behavior is assumed for steel as well as for 
concrete in the composite section. 
 
 
3. Reference Test Columns 
 
Ten test PEC columns from the published literature are selected for current study. The lists of 
these specimens, along with their properties, are given in table 1. Figure 2 shows the cross-
section and elevation of a typical test column. Specimens C-2 to C-7 were tested during the initial 
phase of the research program by Tremblay et al. (2002) to study the behavior under concentric 
gravity loading which had square cross-sections of 300 mm × 300 mm and 450 mm × 450 mm,  
1310 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2 Typical PEC Test Column, (a) Cross-section, (b) Elevation 
 
and a length equal to 5d, where d is the depth of the cross-section. Specimens C-8 to C-11, tested 
by Chicoine et al. (2002) under axial compression, was larger in their cross–sectional dimensions 
(600 mm×600 mm) as compared to the previous test specimens. 
 
All the test columns were fabricated from CSA-G40.21-350W grade steel plate. Normal strength 
concrete (nominally 30 MPa) was used in the test region of these columns. To strengthen the end 
regions of these test specimens, high strength concrete of 60 MPa nominal strength was used 
along with the closer link spacing provided in these zones. 
 
Table 1 Properties of Reference Test Specimens 
 
Reference Specimen Plate size 
bf x d x t 
 
Link 
spacing 
s 
 
Link 
diameter 
Φ 
Length 
L 
 
Compressive 
Strength of 
concrete 
 
Yield 
strength 
of 
plates 
 
  (mm) (mm) (mm) (mm) ( MPa) (MPa) 
Tremblay 
et al. 
(1998) 
C-2 450x450x9.70 225 12. 7 2250 32. 7 370 
C-3 450x450x9.70 337.5 12. 7 2250 32. 4 370 
C-4 450x450x9.70 450 12. 7 2250 31. 9 370 
C-5 450x450x9.70 225 22. 2 2250 34. 3 370 
C-6 450x450x6.35 337.5 12. 7 2250 33. 1 374 
C-7 300x300x6.35 300 12. 7 1500 31. 9 374 
Chicoine 
et al. 
(2002) 
C-8 600x600x12.88 600 15. 9 3000 34. 2 360 
C-9 600x600x12.91 600 15. 9 3000 34. 2 360 
C-10 600x600x12.81 300 15. 9 3000 34. 2 360 
C-11 600x600x9.70 600 15. 9 3000 34. 2 345 
 
 
 
 
1311 
 
4. Formulation of Equivalent Steel Section 
 
The fictitious steel cross-section consists of the actual steel cross-section and two additional pairs 
of plates, one perpendicular to the web at mid-height and one perpendicular to the flanges at mid-
width as shown in Figure 3. The cross-sections of the fictitious and the actual column are 
equivalent in that they have the same: 
1. Resistance in compression, and 
2. Bending stiffness about the two principal centroidal axes. 
In order to produce the equivalent fictitious steel section, the dimensions of the two pairs of steel 
plates added to the initial cross-section is to be determined from the algebraic expressions of the 
three equivalence criteria: compression resistance and bending stiffness about the two principal 
axes. 
 
4.1. Equivalence in Compression Resistance 
 
The compression resistance of a composite steel-concrete cross section comprises of the plastic 
resistance of the steel cross-section, steel links and the concrete. The total area of the fictitious 
cross-section represents the area combining area of the initial steel cross-section and the 
additional plates. 
 
     ccsseactual fAfAP   
 
 
       sasefictit fAAP                                                     (1)                                                 
 
Here, Ase = effective area of the steel shape including the I section and the links 
Aa = total steel area of the additional steel plates in fictitious section 
fs= design stress of steel= fy 
fc= design stress of concrete 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3 Equivalent steel section for PEC column (a) Actual cross-section (b) Equivalent steel 
section 
 ca 
ba 
    be 
d   ha 
t 
1312 
 
The effective area of a non-compact steel section can be defined as, 
 
   tbtdA ese )22(                                           (2)                                         
 
Here, overall depth of the cross section 
 Thickness of the steel plates 
Total effective width of the flange 
Now,   
 
 
 
 
 
     
kE
F
t
b
s
ys
p 2
2 )1(12




  
 
     75.2)(2.09.0 
f
f
b
s
b
s
k ,      15. 
fb
s  
 
Here, bf = full width of a flange plate 
   λp = Slenderness parameter 
   Es = Elastic modulus of steel 
   νs = Poisson’s ratio of steel 
   n = 1.5 as proposed by Chicoine et al. (2002) 
Considering the condition of equivalence in compression resistance and the relation in Equation 1, 
it is obtained 
 
     cdc
s
c
ca mAf
f
AA                                         (3)                                                       
 
Here,  design-stress ratio for concrete-to-steel 
The total area of the composite cross-section comprises the equivalent steel cross section Ase and 
concrete section Ac. 
 
     csef AAdb                                              (4)                                                                                                                 
 
Dividing Equation 2 by  and introducing the non dimensional parameters ρse’ and a positive 
constant qx 2,  
 
2''
xsecd
f
a qmdb
A                                              (5)                                    
 
The total cross-sectional area of the four additional plates in the fictitious section as shown in 
f
nn
p
f
e b
b
b 

 12 )1( 
1313 
 
Figure 3 is,  
 
tchbA aaaa  22                                           (6)                        
 
Which after normalization by  and introduction of normalized plate dimensions β, η, χ and γ 
becomes: 
 
    22 db
A
f
a                                          (7)                                                                                                                
 
Since Equation 4 and Equation 6 are identical in left hand sides, the outcome is: 
 
   )2(22 xq                                              (8) 
                                                                                                     
Here the unknowns are β, η and χ on the left side and the combined geometric and material 
attributes of the actual cross-section enter through the constants  and qx 2. 
 
4.2. Equivalence in stiffness about major axis 
 
The flexural stiffness about the major axis y-y of the actual composite steel-concrete cross-
section and its fictitious purely steel counterpart are given by: 
 
  ycseyseseactualy IEIEEI ,,,   
 
  yaseysesefictity IEIEEI ,,,                                       (9)   
                                                                                                                                     
Here, and are the effective elastic modulus of steel and concrete respectively.  
and are the moment of inertia about minor axis for actual steel section, concrete and 
additional steel plates respectively. 
To enforce the condition of equivalence in major-axis stiffness, solving for Ia,y and introducing 
the concrete-to-steel ratio of elasticity moduli, 
 
yce
ycse
ce
ya ImIE
EI .
,
, 





                                    (10) 
 
In reference to Figure 1(a), 
 
2
,, yseseyse rAI   
 
Equation 9 may be written as: 
 






 2,
3
, 12 ysese
f
eya rA
dbmI                                     (11) 
1314 
 
After normalization of Equation 11 by dividing it with bfd3/12 and using qy2 as a positive constant 
to sum up the effects of the geometry and material properties of the actual cross section, the final 
equation is, 
 
  22 ,3 3112 yysesee
f
a qmdb
I 





                            (12) 
 
Here, 
 
d
ray
yse
2
,   
 
The additional major-axis flexural stiffness of the fictitious cross-section as a function of the 
dimensions of the additional plates is given by: 
 
    333 212122 ddcthbI aaaa 



  
 
This, after normalization with (bfd3/12) and introduction of the non-dimensional geometric 
properties β, η, χ, and γ, yields: 
 
    112212 333,  db
I
f
ya                             (13) 
 
Since Equation 12 and Equation 13 have identical left-hand sides, 
 
     233 1122 yq                                     (14) 
 
4.3. Equivalence in stiffness about minor axis 
 
The treatment of major axis stiffness equivalence presented in the previous subsection is repeated 
here in shorthand for the minor-axis case. 
First, minor-axis counterpart of Equation 11: 
 












 2 ,
3
,
3
, 1212 zsese
f
ezse
f
eza rA
dbmIdbmI                    (15) 
 
After normalization of Equation 15 by dividing it with bfd3/12 and using qz2 as a positive constant 
they obtained equation is 
 
  22 ,3, 3112 zzsesee
f
za qmdb
I






                             (16) 
1315 
 
Here, 
 
d
raz
zse
2
,    
 
db
A
f
se
se   
 
Similarly for the additional elements of the fictitious steel cross-section, one obtains the 
counterpart of Equation 13, 
 
     3333, 2212  db
I
f
za                           (17) 
 
Since Equation 16 and Equation 17 have identical left-hand sides, the outcome is, 
 
     2333 22 zq                                   (18) 
 
Here the unknowns are β, χ on the left side and the combined geometric and material attributes of 
the actual cross-section enter through the constants γ and qz2. 
In order to transform the actual section in to fictitious section, three non-linear Equations 8, 14 
and 18 were developed. Three non-dimensional parameters, qx2, qy2 and qz2 describe the 
additional compression resistance major-axis stiffness, and minor-axis stiffness, respectively, due 
to concrete and links. These equations must be solved for the three non-dimensional unknowns’ β, 
χ and η to determine the dimensions of the additional steel plate’s ba, ha, and ca in the fictitious 
cross-section. 
 
 
5. Comparison of Fictitious Section with Actual Section 
 
The methodology described in the previous section is implemented to compute the equivalent 
steel sections of the reference test PEC columns mentioned in Table 1. The dimensions of the 
additional steel plates representing the concrete part of the composite section are provided in 
Table 2. The geometric properties of the equivalent steel sections for columns C-2 to C-11 is 
calculated and compared to their actual composite cross-section. Table 3 presents the comparison 
between the cross-sectional area and moment of inertias of the composite and equivalent steel 
section of the column. The results show that the cross-sectional area and the moment of inertia 
about the major axis for equivalent steel section are in excellent agreement with the actual 
composite section. The moment of inertia about major axis of the steel section is found to be 
around 1% lower than that of the composite section. This difference is within acceptable range. 
 
 
 
 
 
1316 
 
Table 2 Development of Equivalent Steel Section for Partially Encased Composite Column 
 
Specime
n 
Composite steel section Equivalent steel section 
bf d t s φ be ba ha ca t 
C-2 450 450 9.7 225 12.7 368.08 311.41 21.01 196.36 9.7 
C-3 450 450 9.7 337.5 12.7 371.48 311.48 21.00 196.36 9.7 
C-4 450 450 9.7 450 12.8 375.89 316.73 19.99 196.36 9.7 
C-5 450 450 9.7 225 22.2 368.08 301.79 23.05 196.36 9.7 
C-6 450 450 6.35 337.5 12.7 265.46 306.59 22.97 259.36 6.35 
C-7 300 300 6.35 300 12.7 247.74 228.29 11.93 142.27 6.35 
C-8 600 600 12.88 600 15.9 503.43 390.34 32.80 258.57 12.88 
C-9 600 600 12.91 600 15.9 503.97 390.37 32.78 258.15 12.91 
C-10 600 600 12.81 300 15.9 491.82 390.10 32.88 259.57 12.81 
C-11 600 600 9.7 600 15.9 420.41 387.32 34.62 312.89 9.7 
 
Table 3 Comparison Between the Properties of Composite and Fictitious Section 
 
Specimens Area Moment of inertia about of 
major axis 
Moment of inertia about 
minor axis 
CPS 
*103 
EQS 
*103 
 CPS 
*106 
EQS 
*106 
 CPS 
*106 
EQS 
*106 
 
C-2 16.76 16.90 0.99 410.13 410.63 1.00 443.14 443.14 1.00 
C-3 16.76 16.89 0.99 410.13 410.63 1.00 443.14 443.14 1.00 
C-4 16.35 16.47 0.99 410.13 410.57 1.00 443.14 443.14 1.00 
C-5 17.58 17.72 0.99 410.13 410.77 1.00 443.14 443.14 1.00 
C-6 17.17 17.38 0.99 432.84 433.47 1.00 455.13 455.13 1.00 
C-7 7.20 7.25 0.99 91.40 91.47 1.00 98.61 98.61 1.00 
C-8 32.03 32.27 0.99 1264.62 1267.01 1.00 1365.96 1365.96 1.00 
C-9 32.02 32.26 0.99 1264.15 1266.55 1.00 1365.71 1365.71 1.00 
C-10 32.04 32.30 0.99 1265.69 1268.10 1.00 1366.54 1366.54 1.00 
C-11 32.56 32.89 0.99 1314.18 1316.93 1.00 1392.22 1392.22 1.00 
MEAN             0.99                      1.00              1.00   
SD             0.00                      0.00              0.00                    
1317 
 
6. Conclusion 
 
The composite cross-section of thin walled partially encased composite column was replaced by 
an equivalent steel section. The formulation of the fictitious steel plates replacing the concrete 
part of the composite cross-section was presented in the paper. Linear elastic material behavior 
was considered during the formulation. The local buckling of the thin flange plates were 
incorporated by considering the effective width of the flange plates. The proposed methodology 
was used to calculate the equivalent steel section of ten PEC columns with a variety of geometric 
properties under concentric gravity loading only. The geometric properties of the actual 
composite section and the equivalent section were compared. The cross-sectional area and 
moment of inertias for the equivalent steel section were found to be very close to properties of the 
actual composite section. The proposed methodology can reliably replace the composite section 
with an equivalent steel section. 
 
  
Acknowledgements 
 
All assistance including laboratory, computing and financial supports from Bangladesh 
University of Engineering and Technology (BUET), Dhaka, Bangladesh are gratefully 
acknowledged. 
 
 
References 
 
Begum, M., Elwi, A. E.,and Driver, R. G. (2007). “Finite-Element Modeling of Partially Encased 
Composite Columns Using the Dynamic Explicit Method.” Journal of Structural Engineering, 
ASCE, 133 (3), 326-334. 
Bouchereau, R., and Toupin, J. D. (2003).“Étude du comportement en compression-flexion des 
poteaux mixtes  partiellement enrobés”, Rep.No. EPM/GCS-2003-03, Dept. of Civil, 
Geological,and Mining Engineering, cole Poly Technique, Montréal.  
Chicoine, T., Tremblay,R., Massicotte, B., Ricles, J., and Lu, L.W. (2002 ).“Behavior and strength 
of partially-encased composite columns with built up shapes.” J. Struct. Eng., 128(3), 279–
287. 
Prickett, B. S.and Driver, R. G. (2006). “Behavior of Partially Encased Composite Columns Made 
with High Performance Concrete.”  Structural Engineering Report No 262, Dept. of Civil 
and Environmental Engineering, University of Alberta, AB, Canada. 
Tremblay, R., Massicotte, B., Filion, I., and Maranda, R. (1998) . “Experimental study on the 
behavior of partially encased composite columns made with light welded H steel shapes under 
compressive axial loads.” Proc., Structural Stability Research Council Annual Technical 
Session and Meeting, Atlanta, 195–204. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
1318 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
COMPARATIVE STUDY ON BUILDING CONSTRUCTION TECHNOLOGY AMONG 
DHAKA AND SYLHET CITY 
 
 
Muhammad Saiful Islam1, Hasibur Rahman2 and Md. Ashrafuzzaman3 
 
 
ABSTRACT: The study considers the building construction technology in Bangladesh. Projects 
investigated in this study include both residential and commercial buildings and carried out to 
evaluate the existing situation of using technology in construction. In Bangladesh, mechanization 
and techniques of building construction being practiced in various construction projects. The 
ground survey works have been carried out by visiting different construction sites and collected 
all possible and related information through interviews and questionnaires of the workers and 
engineers. From the research, it is clear that the capital city Dhaka are already introduced with 
some modern technologies to ensure quality constructions compared to that of remote city like 
Sylhet. Finally, it is ended that proper mechanization and implementation of modern building 
construction techniques would bring significant economy in building construction by improving 
its quality and reducing time, cost and unwanted risk. 
 
Keywords: Construction technology, Building materials, Questionnaires. 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Building construction equipment means the usual equipments that are used for the construction 
work in our country. The proper management of any building construction project depends on the 
maintaining the technology or using construction equipment. The success of a construction 
project depends entirely upon the choice of construction equipment or using technology and if 
right equipment is selected, the work can be completed in short time with lesser cost. Some of the 
modern equipments and machineries are introduced here which are available in Bangladesh. 
 
1.1. Layout check equipments 
 
Layout check in field is an important work for constructing a structure exactly as per design 
which is now done by theodolite and may define as an instrument for measuring both horizontal 
and vertical angles, consisting of a small telescope mounted on a tripod. It is a key tool in 
surveying and engineering work, particularly on inaccessible ground. Besides, Level machine is 
                                                        
1Assistant Professor,CEE Department, SUST, Sylhet, Bangladesh. msaifulislam98@gmail.com  
2Student,Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, SUST, Sylhet, Bangladesh. hasib_cee@yah
oo.com 
3Student,Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, SUST, Sylhet, Bangladesh. md.mthn@gm
ail.com 
 
 
1319 
 
also used to check layout and excavation depth in construction. 
 
1.2. Excavation equipment 
 
One of the technology, name Wheel loader/ Power shovel (locally known as excavator), is a pay-
loader, defined as a type of tractor, usually wheeled, sometimes on tracks, that has a front 
mounted square wide bucket connected to the end of two booms (arms) to scoop up loose 
material from the ground, such as dirt, sand or gravel, and move it from one place to another 
without pushing the material across the ground. There are some other equipment used to excavate 
and transfer the materials from the site such as wheel borrow, calm shell bucket, shovel, 
bulldozer etc. are shown in following figures. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.3. Backfilling equipment 
 
To compact the soil, concrete etc. some equipments are used for backfilling or concreting purpose 
in Bangladesh such as static earth rammer, vibrating earth rammer, durum etc. in which vibrating 
earth rammer is popular and most effective to compact the soil. Figure-4 shows the picture of 
such a compactor. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.4. Crushing and screening equipment 
 
Naturally coarse aggregate are found in various size and shape and required to crush and screen 
for fabricating sized aggregate to make concrete. Thus, equipments are necessary for the purposes 
such as stone crusher, hammer, screener etc. which are shown in figure-5.  
 
 
 
Figure 1 Wheel loader 
  
Figure 2 Wheel borrow 
 
Figure 3 Calm shell bucket 
 
Figure 4 Vibrating earth rammer  
 
Figure 5 Stone crusher  
 
 
1320 
 
1.5. Concrete manufacturing equipment 
 
At present, technology is available to manufacture concrete in industry and define as ready mix 
concrete (RMC) where the product is environment friendly with predefined strength because the 
raw materials are mixed with automatic measuring equipments. Such RMC are manufactured 
through batching plant and mixture machine with others necessary equipments which are shown 
in the following figure. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
1.6. Materials transporting equipment 
 
To make easy and quick transport of the construction materials and equipments to elevated path 
for multi-storied buildings or others structures, modern technologies are available in Bangladesh 
such as roof hoist, tower hoist, heavy hoist, concrete pump, passenger lift etc. It is most 
commonly used in the placing of ready mixed concrete. Concrete pumps are used to transport 
concrete under pressure through some type of piping system from the transit mixer which carries 
ready mixed concrete from the concrete hatching plant to the construction site. Heavy material 
hoist are widely used at the sites of industrial and civil construction, bridge construction, 
underground construction, large chimney construction ship industry etc. and passenger lift are 
suitable for the vertical transport of materials and people. Following figures shows the 
equipments. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.7. Shuttering equipment 
 
Various types of shuttering materials are available in construction market such as steel shutter, 
bamboo props, steel props etc. Steel shutter is built out of prefabricated modules with a metal 
frame (usually steel or aluminum) and covered on the application (concrete) side with material 
having the wanted surface structure (steel, aluminum, timber, etc.). The two major advantages of 
 
Figure 6 Batching plant  
 
Figure 7 Mixer machine  
  
Figure 8 Roof hoist Figure 9 Heavy material hoist 
 
 
1321 
 
formwork systems, compared to traditional timber formwork, are speed of construction (modular 
systems pin, clip, or screw together quickly) and lower life-cycle costs. Bamboo prop is an object 
placed beneath or against a structure to keep it from falling or shaking. It may be made of 
bamboo. They are available and cheap than the steel props. Steel pipe prop is widely used 
because of the convenience. These are adjustable, easily reusable and give better support than the 
bamboo props. Moreover, they are long-lasting. Following figures show the steel shutter use in 
construction field of Bangladesh. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. Aim of Study 
 
Extreme a large number of limitations exist for developing and improving the building 
construction management in Bangladesh due to technology constrains. The construction practice 
no doubt can improve by adopting advanced technology and changing over to mechanize the 
system for construction and give to efficient management. However, considering the resource 
constrains, conditions of available resources and adoption of appropriate of technology etc. the 
objectives of the study are to discover the present status of building construction technologies in 
Sylhet and Dhaka city of Bangladesh and to compare the construction techniques available 
among the both cities.  
 
3. Methodology 
 
The study on building construction technology present to future includes all the details survey in 
study area like Dhaka and Sylhet city. The process performed, equipments used, techniques 
followed in construction sites are the focus of the research. Before starting the study, firstly the 
literature related to the research is reviewed, then questionnaire is prepared to do the survey 
works and various type of techniques are followed to collect the answer of the questions. Finally, 
survey data is analysis graphically to present the study result with more comprehensively.  
 
3.1. Literature search 
 
A literature search involves reviewing all readily available materials. These materials can include 
internal company information, relevant trade publications, newspapers, magazines, annual reports, 
company literature, on-line databases, and any other published materials. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Figure 10 Steel shutter Figure 11 Steel props 
 
 
1322 
 
3.2. Types of survey methods conducted 
 
There are many ways to get information in any building construction project. Surveys are just one 
tool for getting the information you need for analysis. The most common survey methods are:  
 
3.2.1. Talking with responsible people 
Talking with responsible people is a good way to get information during the initial stages of a 
research project that can use to gather information, which is not publicly available, or is too new 
to find in the literature. 
 
3.2.2. Focus group discussion 
A focus group is used as a preliminary research technique to explore people's ideas and attitudes. 
A group of 6 to 10 people meet in a conference-room-like setting with a trained moderator. Their 
disadvantage is that the sample is small and may not be representative of the population in 
general. 
 
3.2.3. Telephone survey 
Telephone surveys are the fastest method of gathering information from a relatively large sample 
(100-400 respondents). The interviewer follows a prepared script through that telephone call is 
essentially the same as a written questionnaire. 
 
3.2.4. Post mail survey 
Mail surveys are a cost effective method of gathering information. Because there is no 
interviewer, there is no possibility of interviewer bias. The main disadvantage is the inability to 
probe respondents for more detailed information.   
 
3.2. Preparation of questionnaire 
 
Preparation of questionnaire includes the question types, reliability and validity, strength and 
weakness of the questions, etc. Questionnaires are printed lists of questions used to find out what 
people think or feel about an issue, product, or service. They can be filled in away from the 
researcher in the form of a self-administered, group-administered, or postal questionnaire. 
 
3.3.1. Questions type 
Questionnaires can provide quantitative data using close (or fixed-response) questions, where the 
respondent is presented with a number of alternative responses to a question and asked to mark 
the one that they feel is most appropriate (Oppenheim, 1992). Qualitative data can be gathered 
using open (or free-response) questions to which respondents are asked to write their own answer 
(1998; Oppenheim, 1992). However, closed questions are more specific than open ones, 
communicate the same frame of reference to all respondents, and well designed response 
categories can more accurately detect differences among respondents (Jean et al., 1986).  
 
3.3.2. Strength and weakness of survey 
“Oppenheim (1992) showed that postal questionnaires can be a cheap and effective method for 
gathering data from a large number of widely dispersed people. Besides, strength is that, because 
the researcher is not present while the respondents make their answers, data collected using 
questionnaires is free of any investigator effects”. However, the weaknesses of postal 
 
 
1323 
 
questionnaires are related to the fact that they may be filled in away from the researcher. 
  
3.3. Design of questionnaire 
 
Design of questionnaire includes the characteristics and principles of the questionnaire. It is the 
most important part in which the success of a suitable questionnaire depends. Questionnaire 
design is a systematic process. During preparation of questionnaire, the main target of surveyor is 
to maximize response from the respondents. To attain this questionnaire should be simple, easy to 
understand and short enough so that it does not require excessive time of the person concerned. 
Questionnaire should design to direct address the goal of the study. 
 
3.4.1 Characteristics 
 
A few studies have recommended certain typographical characteristics that benefit perception, 
comprehension and memory of printed material in older people (Hartley, 1994; Morrell and Echt, 
1997). These include: using a large type size of 12-14 point; using a sans-serif typeface as 
opposed to serif (with finishing strokes at the ends of the letters) or novelty typefaces; clarifying 
the structure of the text, e.g. by using spacing, headings, summaries, numbering, etc.; using 
proper application of directive cues, e.g. bold type, underlining and italics, to call attention to key 
words, phrases or sections of text; avoiding use of all capitals in body text; using clear layouts, 
organizing the material in a standard format (e.g. Small, discrete segments); using simple 
language; avoiding negatives and inferences; and phrasing text in the active rather than the 
passive voice. There has been much argument over whether text should be left and right justified 
(all lines are made an equal length by varying the spacing between words) or just left justified 
(word spacing is consistent and line endings are ragged). It seems that there is little difference 
between fully justified and left justified text in terms of legibility, reading speed or 
comprehension (Hartley, 1994). However, Hartley (1994) argues that there are indications that 
left justified text might be more helpful for less able readers, be they young children or elderly 
people. 
   As with focus groups, careful design of the questions is needed to ensure that the information 
the researchers seek can be gathered with as few questions as possible. No recommendations 
exist on the length of time a questionnaire should take to complete for elderly respondents. 
However, as Oppenheim (1992) notes, a person's perception of whether a questionnaire is too 
long is influenced by factors such as how interested they are in the topic and whether a pre-paid 
return envelope is provided. Older people are inordinately affected by increases in task 
complexity. In a study that uses elderly people as subjects, it therefore makes sense to keep things 
simple. As with focus groups, this means keeping questions simple and short by using such words 
that the intended recipients understand and limits the questions to a single dimension, avoiding 
questions such as if your answer was "no", then go to question 10 could also simplify the task of 
filling in a questionnaire. Finally, the questionnaires should be pilot tested on people similar to 
the target recipients for ease of reading and understanding before they are used in a survey. 
   Following the findings of the focus group investigation, the aim of this study was broadened. 
In particular, the findings showed that a printed publication may not be the most suitable method 
for delivering information to elderly, disabled elderly people and their careers about the various 
forms of support available to them. 
 
 
 
1324 
 
3.4.2 Principles 
The questionnaire for each group of recipients, was designed according to the following 
principles: the areas and items covered by the questions should be determined by the findings of 
the focus group investigation; the design should follow recommendations for the design of 
printed materials for use by elderly people; and the wording of the questions should be simple 
and also determined by the findings of the focus group investigation. It should not take too long 
for the recipients to complete the questionnaires. Questionnaire design is a long process that 
demands careful attention. Questionnaires are versatile, allowing the collection of both subjective 
and objective data by open or closed format questions. Modem computers have only made the 
task of collecting and extracting valuable material more efficient. However, a questionnaire is 
only as good as the questions it contains. The majority deal with making the questionnaire 
understandable and free of bias. Mindful review and testing is necessary to weed out minor 
mistakes that can cause great changes in meaning and interpretation. When these guidelines are 
followed, the questionnaire becomes a powerful and economic evaluation tool. Most of the 
mentioned characteristics and principles of questionnaire design are followed during the design 
of selected questionnaires for the study.  
   
4. Result and Discussion 
 
Analysis of survey data and interpretation of these is the most important task of the study. The 
main objective of this work totally depends on the accuracy of the data analysis and interpretation. 
To analyze the data graphical representation and method of percentage is adopted. Survey data 
includes two types i.e. site information and technology use for different phases of construction 
works considering quality control and time period for construction. These data are collected by 
survey from 12 different building construction sites in Sylhet and 14 different building 
construction sites in Dhaka city. To analyze the survey data and interpret it, the graphical method 
is used for better understanding. All the data are interpreted by numerical value and with the help 
of Microsoft Excel and the graphical representations are made. 
 
4.1. Layout check techniques 
 
The first step of the construction work is to set the perpendicular line for the trenching and 
excavate the site perpendicular to the ground level. Figure 12 indicates that use of traditional 
method of layout technique is practiced rather than using the modern technology. Recently the 
construction works become more machine related; the use of the theodolite is increasing in 
Dhaka area for the layout check but very few in Sylhet. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 12 Layout technique of a building 
 
Figure 13 Water removing system 
 
 
1325 
 
4.2. Water removing system 
 
The whole assembly is submerged in the fluid to be pumped. Submersible pumps also are easily 
primed (removing air from the suction line) compared to other alternatives. From Figure 13, it 
indicates how popular the pumping method of dewatering in our country. Most of the 
construction site uses this method for dewatering where less construction site followed the other 
traditional method of dewatering in both areas. 
 
4.3. Earth excavation and compaction system 
 
The excavation work is mainly done by man power. It actually depends on the construction area 
of work. For small area, man power is suitable rather than machine. But for large area of 
construction machine is used for excavation to save the time and money. From figure 14, the 
static earth rammer is used in 4 sites of Dhaka city but most of the building construction sites in 
Sylhet are done by manpower. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.4. Aggregate fabrication techniques 
 
Aggregate crushing is generally done by machine for stone chips and brick chips. But for small 
and economic construction, brick chips are produced by crushing the brick with the help of day 
labor. A few farms still use day-labor for crushing brick chips alternatively mechanical crushing  
 
 
 
 
 
 
of aggregate is increased day by day as in above figure, 83% sites crushed the aggregate by 
mechanical means where only 17% by day-labor in Sylhet city but all sites in Dhaka are done by 
mechanical means. 
 
 
Figure 14 Excavation method 
 
Figure 15 Compaction techniques 
  
Figure 16 Aggregate crushing system in Sylhet Figure 17 Aggregate crushing system in Dhaka 
 
 
1326 
 
4.5. Concrete mixing type 
 
There are two types of concrete is available in Bangladesh. Ready mixed concrete is suitable for 
large concreting and the mixed at site concrete is suitable for small volume of concrete. During 
the slab and beam casting for medium to large construction site, ready mixed concrete is used; 
while for column and lintel casting mixed-at-site concrete is used. From figure 18, it represents 
that among 26 different building construction sites, 12 of them use the concrete mixed at their site 
in Sylhet. In Dhaka city, 2 of them use fully ready mixed concrete for large volume of concreting 
and 12 sites use both type of concrete for their large volume of concreting. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.6. Construction materials and concrete lifting techniques 
 
Lifting device is used for material raising or cumbersome objects. Sometimes concrete bucket are 
used with the roof hoist and tower hoist. They are specially designed for mass placement of 
concrete in large projects. From figure 19 it is clear that all the sites in Sylhet lifting materials by 
manually alternatively in Dhaka city 100% sites are done by mechanical means which is shown 
in figure 20 that mean the use of machine is increasing day by day in building construction works 
in Dhaka areas. From figure 21, the concrete pumps is used all sites in Dhaka city but the 
building construction site in Sylhet is not used the concrete pumping technology. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.7 Welding and grinding techniques 
 
It is used for removing or displacing mortar or concrete from steel sheet. The use of grinding 
 
Figure 18 Concrete mixing techniques 
 
Figure 19 Material lifting techniques in Sylhet 
 
Figure 20 Material lifting techniques in Dhaka 
 
Figure 21 Concrete lifting techniques  
 
 
1327 
 
machine is more popular Dhaka than Sylhet. Following figures show that, among 26 building 
construction sites, 8 sites used the welding equipment in Dhaka city and all sites did not use the 
welding equipment in Sylhet city. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.7. Using passenger lift 
 
Passenger lift has their stable performance, reliable, safety, easy transportation and strong 
adaptability can enhance work efficiently and reduce works labor intensity. It is suitable for the 
vertical transport of people and construction equipment. From figure 24 among 26 different 
building construction sites in Sylhet and Dhaka city, only 3 sites used the passenger lift in Dhaka 
city and no sites in Sylhet use the equipment. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.8. Formwork and scaffolding techniques 
 
It shows the use of machine is increasing day by day in building construction works in our 
country. From figure 25 and 26, it indicates that the use of steel shutter or the combination of 
steel shutter with wooden board is more than the single use of wooden board. Among 12 different 
construction sites in Sylhet city, 8% sites used the steel shutter and 75% sites used the wooden 
board. But 100% sites used the steel shutter in Dhaka city. From figure 27 and 28, it is observed 
that type of scaffolding used in our constructions sectors. Around 29% sites used the tabular 
metal scaffolding where 57% used single scaffolding, 14% used the both types of scaffolding in 
Dhaka city and 92% used bamboo in Sylhet city. 
 
 
Figure 22 Using grinding machine 
 
Figure 23 Using welding machine 
 
Figure 24 Using passenger lift Figure 25 Shuttering materials in Sylhet 
 
 
 
1328 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.9. Curing techniques 
 
The traditional method of curing for beam and slab is pending, for column it is the use of wet 
gunny bag and for the plastered surface spraying is done by pipes or other equipments as the 
method of curing. From figure 29, it represents that among 26 different building construction 
sites, most of the building construction site are practicing ponding, spraying and wet gunny bag 
method but the method of fogging is not practicing. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5. Conclusion 
 
From the above discussion it is clear that the utility of construction equipments improves the 
quality of works and overall construction safety as well as reduce the completion time of the 
construction. But the limitations of various equipments in Bangladesh are to be considered and 
their proper uses to be ensured. The technicians are to be trained up and proper methods of 
maintenance of those available and they are practiced to use appropriate construction technology. 
Utilizing construction technique in a building construction companies are gained more effective 
construction process. The study covers the survey of construction technology, state of 
construction techniques and construction equipment being used; these construction technologies 
are revealed to be smooth and efficient building construction practice. Result shows the 
mechanization for construction has not yet reached at satisfactory level. In view point of using 
technology, the capital city Dhaka is more advance than peripheral city Sylhet where the 
 
Figure 26 Shuttering materials in Dhaka 
 
Figure 27 Scaffolding techniques in Sylhet 
  
Figure 28 Scaffolding techniques in Dhaka Figure 29 Curing techniques  
 
 
1329 
 
construction industries are growing and rising so fast and regarding earthquake the city is in 
zone-3, the most vulnerable zone of Bangladesh. Reinforcement cutting, bending, concrete 
mixing, placing, compaction, curing etc. may be fully mechanized but most of the technology are 
absent in Sylhet and very limited numbers are used in Dhaka. Thus, overall construction in 
Bangladesh, are depending on cheap manpower rather than machine which lead poor quality and 
time consuming construction. Thus, planned utilization of equipment at different stages of 
construction is a necessity for faster and quality construction. These equipments should be owned 
by specialized organization and provided to builders through a back system in a manner to 
minimize the idle time. Construction methods and techniques being practiced have a vast scope 
for modernization and improvement.  
 
References 
 
Dobrowolski, Joseph (1998). “Concrete Construction Hand Book" 4th Edition Printed. 
Hartley, J. (1994).Three ways to improve the clarity of journal abstracts. 
Jean M. Converse, Stanley Presser, Converse (1986). Survey Questions. 
Morrell Q. W. and Etch K. V. (1997). Designing Written instructions for older adults learning to  
use computers. 
Oppenheim, A. N. (1992). Questionnaire design, interviewing and attitude measurement. 
Schuman and Presser (1996).Questions & Answers in Attitude Surveys. 
 
 
 
 
 
1330 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
NON-DESTRUCTIVE TEST OF THREE SCHOOL BUILDINGS IN SYLHET CITY, 
BANGLADESH 
 
 
K. M. Khaleduzzaman1 and Mehedi Ahmed Ansary 2 
 
 
ABSTRACT: In this paper earthquake vulnerability assessment of three school buildings of 
Sylhet city has been presented. Initially Rapid Visual Screening (RVS) survey and Modified 
Turkish Method have been used to evaluate the school buildings; later on non-destructive tests of 
different elements of those buildings have been assessed using Ferroscan and Microtremor. 
Finally FEM analysis of those buildings have been carried out using the software ETABS.   
 
Keywords: NDT, earthquake, vulnerability assessment, Ferroscan, Microtremor, FEM 
1. Introduction 
 
In earthquake prone areas there is a need for the assessment of the capacities of large numbers of 
existing buildings. The results of such assessment are essential for rational planning of retrofit 
programs for existing buildings before the occurrence of a strong earthquake, for the allocation of 
rescue forces and equipment to optimally deal with the forecasted damage.  The seismic 
evaluation and retrofitting of school buildings lying in high seismic zones is important towards 
initiation of disaster mitigation as the damage of a house kills a family but damage to a school 
creates panic too many families and more importantly next generation.   
 
Sylhet, a divisional city of north-eastern region of Bangladesh, is one of the most vulnerable 
cities of Bangladesh. Literacy rate is more than 70 percent and it is increasing day by day. More 
than one hundred educational institutions are located in this area. But lots of school and college in 
this historic city are very old. Most of the existing school buildings are 2 or 3 storied reinforced 
concrete frame buildings with infill brick walls and 1 storied brick masonry buildings with 
reinforced concrete roofs and using cement mortar in most of the cases. A moderate level 
earthquake may create a huge damage to property and valuable lives. In a previous study (Ahmed 
et al., 2011), earthquake risk assessment of fifty schools and college buildings have been assessed 
using RVS technique. In this study, more detailed seismic vulnerability assessment using NDT 
and computer modeling of three school buildings have been carried out and presented. 
 
 
                                                        
1Research Engineer, BNUS, BUET, Dhaka; E mail: nayansustcee@yahoo.com 
2Director, BNUS and Professor, Civil Engineering Dept., BUET, Dhaka; Email: ansary@ce.buet.ac.bd 
1331 
 
2. Study Area 
 
Sylhet is one of the rapidly growing metropolitan areas, located in the northeast region of 
Bangladesh and situated at 24.85° latitude and 91.80° longitudes. Sylhet has been upgraded to a 
city corporation (SCC) from a municipal board in 2001. The city has been granted metropolitan 
city status in March 2009. SCC occupies a total area of 26.5 sq. km with a population of around 
0.5 million. Population density is 17,479/km2. There are 22 intermediate college, 36 high schools, 
11 English medium school and 7 madrashas in this city. Figure 1 shows the locations of the 
evaluated schools and colleges. 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Location of the surveyed schools within Sylhet City (after Ahmed et al., 2011) 
 
3. RVS Results  
 
Seismic performance score for around 50 school and colleges of Sylhet city have been already 
been estimated (Ahmed et al., 2011). In this study, three schools have been surveyed and their 
RVS scores are presented in Tables 1 to 3.  
 
Table 1: Calculated performance scores of Zindabazar Govt. Primary School 
 
Numbe
r of 
Stories 
Base Scores(BS) Vulnerability Scores(VS) Scor
e Zone I 
(60<PGV<8
Zone II 
(40<PGV<6
Zone III 
(20<PGV<40
Soft 
Story 
Heavy 
Overhan
Apparen
t Quality 
Short 
Colum
Poun
ding 
Topograph
y Effects 
78 
3 90 120 140 0 0 -10 0 0 -2 
1332 
 
Table 2: Calculated performance scores of Raja G.C. High School 
 
 
Table 3: Calculated performance scores of The Aided High School 
 
 
4. MICROTREMOR Observation 
 
Soil characteristics can be assessed by Microtremor measurement. Hard soil gives high frequency 
and soft soil gives low frequency. A structure may experience a vibration period at which it 
oscillates in the earthquake vibration motion and will tend to response to that. Natural frequency 
of structure is obtained based on the spectral ration of horizontal component of the structure to 
that of ground. Wave propagation mechanism of Microtremor and its relation with ground 
vibration characteristics were studied from the beginning of Microtremor studies (Aki, 1957; 
Kanai and Tanaka, 1961).  
 
Basically there are two types of Microtremor observations to the number of observation points. 
These are point and array observations of microtremors (Ansary et al., 1996). From the array 
observation of Microtremor of period greater than 1 sec, Rayleigh-wave and Love-wave 
originating from natural sources, such as sea wave, variation of air and wind pressure can be 
recognized. On the other hand, short-period Microtremor of period less than 1 sec is thought to 
be generated by artificial noises such as traffic vehicles, industrial plants, household appliances, 
etc. Some researches (Sato et al., 1991; Tokimatsu and Miyadera, 1992; Tokimatsu et al., 1994) 
have showed that microtremors are mainly composed of Rayleight-wave and some (Nakamura, 
1989; Wakamatsu and Yasui, 1995) have showed that short-period Microtremor bears 
resemblance to shear-wave characteristics. On the other hand, Microtremor can also be 
dominated by Love–wave (Tamura et al., 1993). Recently, Suzuki et al. (1995) have applied 
Microtremor measurements to the estimation of earthquake ground motions based on a 
hypothesis that the amplitude ratio defined by Nakamura can be regarded identical with half of 
the amplification factor from bedrock to the ground surface. However, the real generation and 
nature of microtremors have not yet been established. 
 
In general, the approaches to the identification the dynamic properties of structure can be 
categorized into three main approaches: (1) empirical, (2) numerical analysis, and (3) direct 
measurement approaches. The empirical approach provides simplified formulas for estimating the 
fundamental periods of structures in terms of geometric dimensions of the structures. The second 
Numbe
r of 
Stories 
Base Scores(BS) Vulnerability Scores(VS) Sco
re Zone I 
(60<PGV<8
0) 
Zone II 
(40<PGV<6
0) 
Zone III 
(20<PGV<4
0) 
Soft 
Story 
Heavy 
Overhan
g 
Apparen
t Quality 
Short 
Column
Pou
ndin
g 
Topography 
Effects 
100 
1or 2 100 130 150 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Numbe
r of 
Stories 
Base Scores(BS) Vulnerability Scores(VS) Score 
Zone I 
(60<PGV<8
0) 
Zone II 
(40<PGV<6
0) 
Zone III 
(20<PGV<4
0) 
Soft 
Story 
Heavy 
Overhan
g 
Apparen
t Quality 
Short 
Column 
Pou
ndin
g 
Topography 
Effects 
100 
1or 2 100 130 150 0 0 0 0 0 0 
1333 
 
approach, the numerical analysis, is normally used during the design process. A finite model of 
the structure is first formulated. Dynamic properties such as natural frequencies and vibration 
mode shapes are obtained by the Eigen analysis. The third approach is the direct measurement 
approach, which first measures dynamic responses of existing structures, and then identifies their 
dynamic properties from the measured responses. 
 
4.1. Data Collection and Processing 
 
For Microtremor observation at the school buildings, initially the sensors are deployed. One 
sensor is fixed on the roof of the buildings and another one on the free field near the structure as 
shown in Figure 2. After taking the observation with the help of microtremor, the time domain 
velocity data is converted to frequency domain data and the natural period of the structures have 
been estimated. Microtremor measurement is shown in Figure 3. Around the investigated 
structure three 3-dimensional accelerometers are assembled to measure the ground response of 
the ambient excitation. 
 
 
 
Figure 2: Zindabazar school plan and microtremor observation 
The computation steps of the spectrum analysis is shown in Figure 4 and described as follows: 
 Pre-Processing: 
- 3-dimensional input (the accelerometer in northward direction to get North-South, East-
West and vertical components) 
- Windowing of the signal (in our case only the ambient parts are of interest, observe, in case 
of transient excitation only the transient parts of the time response are of interest) 
 Main Data-Processing: 
3-D Accelerometer 
1334 
 
Hence the three different components of the signal were considered separately. The main data 
processing is repeated for every input-signal (n-Steps according to the numbers of 
preliminary separated windows). 
- FFT is applied to obtain the several spectral amplitudes of the three components 
- Smoothing of the three spectral amplitudes with a bandwidth factor of 10 to 15 
- Afterwards the resulting horizontal component and vertical component are plotted to obtain 
the amplitude in frequency domain. 
 
 
Pre-Processing 
Data-Processing 
 
 
Figure 3: Flowchart of data processing 
 
 
 
4.2. Microtremor Analysis Results 
 
Figure 4 shows individual time histories for X, Y and Z components for a building. Figure 5 
shows FFT of those time histories. Table 5 presents the predominant frequency of the buildings 
in both directions. 
 
 
3-D force-balance 
accelerometer 
3-D time history response 
(sampling rate 100 Hz) 
Ambient Excitation 
Vertical-Component (V) FFT (V) 
FFT (NS) 
FFT (EW) 
Smoothing (EW) 
North-South-Comp. (NS) 
East-West-Comp. (EW) 
Smoothing (V) 
Smoothing (NS) 
Spectrum Analysis 
1335 
 
5 10 15 20
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
A
m
pl
itu
de
 (
m
)
Frequency (Hz)
Zindabazar GPS
 ch-4 (Y-direction)
 ch-5 (X-direction)
0 5 10 15 20
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
A
m
pl
itu
de
 (
m
)
Frequency (Hz)
Raja G.C.High Scgool
 X-Direction
 Y-Direction
Table 5: Predominant frequency of the school buildings 
 
Name of the Schools First Mode Second Mode 
Frequency (Hz) Period (s) Frequency (Hz) Period (s) 
Zindabazar G.P.S 8.15 0.12 5.2 0.19 
Raja GC high School 8.10 0.12 4.7 0.21 
The Aided High School         8.12      0.12         4.8     0.21 
0 2 4 6 8 1 0 1 2 1 4 1 6 1 8 2 0
-2
0
2
4
V
el
oc
ity
 (
m
/s
)
T im e  (s )
 Z -d ire c t io n
0 2 4 6 8 1 0 1 2 1 4 1 6 1 8 2 0
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
 X -d ire c tio n
0 2 4 6 8 1 0 1 2 1 4 1 6 1 8 2 0
-4
-2
0
2  Y -d ire c tio n
 
 
Figure 4: Time history data on the top of the building at Zindabazar G.P.S 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5: Smoothed data of horizontal Fourier spectra of microtremors. 
1336 
 
4.3. Etabs Model 
 
Computer model for the school buildings have been developed. In Figure 6, first mode of ETABS 
model and periods for different modes for Zindabazar School have been shown. It can be seen 
that first mode from the computer model is 0.21 s which is longer than the actual period obtained 
from the microtremor observation (0.12 s). This is due to the presence of different walls located 
in the actual building whereas in the model no walls exist. Also we have run another model using 
cross bracing insist of wall which shows almost the same period (0.13 s) for the model. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6: First mode of ETABS model and periods for different modes for Zindabazar School 
 
 
5. Ferroscan Results 
 
Imagescan and linescan results of beam, column and slab have been carried out for a beam, 
column and slab of the school buildings in the first  floor. Figure 7 presents those results. Figure 
8 shows final sections for different structural components based on the Ferroscan data. Table 6 
presents linescan analysis of column C1. 
 
 
Mode Period 
1 0.205682 
2 0.193634 
3 0.160071 
4 0.079141 
5 0.073774 
6 0.063269 
7 0.049727 
8 0.04596 
9 0.044678 
10 0.037971 
11 0.03720 
12 0.028681 
1337 
 
 
Figure 7: Image Scan results for different structural components 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8: Final sections for different structural components based on the Ferroscan data 
  
Column-C1-1F (Long side) Column-C1-1F (Short side) 
      
 
Slab-1F: center to centre distance is 5 in Beam-1F 
1338 
 
Table 6: Line Scan, hoop position check (Ref: American Concrete Institute, 2002) 
 
Transverse Reinforcement Requirements - Rectangular hoop reinforcement for Column (C1-1F) 
  x y L0 ≥     
Column Dimension 11 21 Larger of C1 or C2 21 in 
Column Height (Clear Span) 9.5 ft Clear Span/6 19 in 
  114 in 18" 18 in 
         
Longitudinal Bar Used  16 mm       
Diameter , D  0.63 in       
Max. Value  between  tie (in a 
plane), hx 6 in       
End Strip Length 19 in       
Middle Strip length 76 in       
            
Spacing Recommended for End Strip : S≤     
S 2.75 in 
0.25 X Smaller of C1 
or C2  2.75 in 
Existing Spacing 5.5 in 
6 X Longitudinal Bar 
Diameter, D 3.75 in 
Remark 
Not 
Satisfied   Sx = 4+[(14-hx|)/3]  66.6 in 
            
Spacing Recommended for Middle Strip 
S 3.75 in S≤     
Existing Spacing 10 in 6" 6 in 
Remark Not Satisfied  
6 X Longitudinal Bar 
Diameter, D 3.75 in 
      
Clear Cover        
Cover depth ≥ 38.1 mm    
Existing min Depth 51 mm    
                                          Remark      Satisfied    
 
 
6. Conclusions 
 
This paper summarizes the microtremor and Ferroscan observations at different school buildings. 
Microtremor observations present the predominant period of the buildings which is important to 
check the resonance condition with the soil period. Ferroscan results also show the inadequate 
reinforcement in the columns. The school buildings need to be retrofitted to save them against 
earthquake loads. 
1339 
 
References 
 
Aki, K. (1957). Space and time spectra of stationary stochastic waves, with special reference to 
microtremors, Bull. Of earthquake research institute, 35, 415-456 
Ahmed, M., K.M.Khaleduzzaman, Nure Alam Siddique, S.Islam (2011). Earthquake 
vulnerability assessment of schools and colleges of sylhet, a north eastern city of Bangladesh, 
CERIE 2011, SUST, Sylhet. 
Ansary, M.A., Yamazaki, F. and Katayama, T. (1996). Application of Microtremor 
Measurements to the estimation of site amplification characteristics, Bulletin of ERS, Vol 29, 
PP: 96-113. 
Kanai, K. and Tanaka T. (1961). On Microtremor VIII, Bull.Earthq. Res.Inst. Tokyo University, 
Vol.39, pp.97-114. 
Nakamura, Y. (1989). A method for dynamic characteristics estimation of subsurface using 
microtremor on the ground surface, QR of RTRI, 30, 25-33 
Sato, T. H. Kawase, M. Matsui, and S. Kataoka (1991). Array measurement of high frequency 
microtremors for underground structure estimation, proc. 4th int. conf. on seismic zonation, 
11,409-416 
Tamura, T., O. Nagai, H. Kikubo, and H. Sumita (1993). Charactesistics of wave group 
microtremors obtained by array measurement, J. Struct. Consr. Eng. AIJ 449, 83-91 (in 
Japanese). 
Toshinawa, T., Inoue M., Yoneyama N., Hoshino Y., Mimura K., and Yokoi Y. (2003),Geologic-
profile estimates of Kofu Basin, Japan, by making use of microtremor 
observations,Geophysical Research Abstracts, Vol. 5, 02079. 
Tokimatsu, K. and Y. Miyadera (1992), “Characteristics of Rayleigh waves in microtremors and 
their relation to underground structures, J.stucture. consr. Eng. AIJ 439, 81-87 
 
1340 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
COST EFFECTIVE DESIGN OF ZERO ENERGY BUILDING IN CONTEXT OF 
BANGLADESH 
 
 
Md. Kamrul Hassan1 and G. M. Jahid Hasan2 
 
 
ABSTRACT: Use of alternative energy has brought a revolution in the field of solution for 
worldwide energy crisis. In the competition of alternative energy technology modern science has 
blessed us with many choices. As a part of this alternative energy revolution, recently Zero 
Energy Building (ZEB) has made its own place in different points of the world though the 
concept is uncommon in Bangladesh. Being in the location of 20.30-26.38 degrees latitude and 
88.04-92.44 degrees longitude has made Bangladesh one of the ideal locations for utilization of 
solar energy as an alternative energy. Hence, ZEB (mainly powered by solar and wind energy) 
should be popular because of its huge power crisis. Major constrain in the ZEB concept is the 
initial construction cost, which is relatively higher than the conventional system. This study 
reflects the probable solution for ZEB in Bangladesh by minimization of the energy demand, 
construction cost and maximization of the efficiency of options for renewable energy system. 
Some additional options (i.e. use of hollow blocks, use of IGUs etc) for buildings also focused 
that may increase energy efficiency in a considerable amount. Zero Energy Building can be an 
attractive and sustainable choice for long term sustainable development of Bangladesh. 
 
Keyword: Zero Energy Building, Power crisis, Construction cost, Building materials, 
Bangladesh. 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Zero Energy Buildings are buildings that over a year are neutral, meaning that they deliver as 
much energy to the supply grids as they use from the grids. ZEBs do not need any fossil fuel for 
heating, cooling, lighting or other energy uses although they sometimes receive energy from the 
grid. In brief, ZEB is any type of building with zero net energy consumption. In the solution to 
the worldwide energy crisis ZEB is playing an important role. Many developed countries like 
USA, UK, Canada, Singapore, China etc are using this concept nowadays to reduce their 
electricity load or particularly energy consumption.  
 
The concept and its use in Bangladesh are completely new and could be an attractive solution for 
its huge energy crisis. The most cost-effective steps in reducing a building's energy consumption 
                                                        
1Research Student, Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, SUST, Sylhet Bangladesh. 
engr.kamrulhassan@gmail.com 
2Professor, Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, SUST, Sylhet, Bangladesh. 
jahid01@yahoo.com 
1341 
 
usually occur during the design stage. To achieve efficient energy use, zero energy design differs 
significantly from conventional construction practice. It also reduces total net monthly living 
cost.  However, initial construction cost will be slightly higher than the conventional buildings, 
which will be difficult to support in a developing nation like Bangladesh. Many ways are to apply 
in a ZEB that provides self energy sufficiency and reduction of the overall construction cost.  In 
this study it is tried to reduce the construction cost by changing building materials and application 
of the techniques that reduce energy consumption and wastage in the energy use. For this purpose 
market price and configuration of various materials are also analyzed and described in the 
following sections. 
 
2. Position of Bangladesh in the revolution of ZEB 
 
Energy crisis is one of the most important obstacles in the development of Bangladesh. New 
residential and commercial buildings are not getting the power connection due to the shortage of 
energy supply. Most important subject is that access to electricity is only 49% of the population 
with area coverage of 55%. To meet this huge crisis of energy Bangladesh has planned to increase 
5% of total power generation by 2015 and 10% by 2020 from renewable energy sources like air, 
waste and solar energy. Bangladesh has a solar energy capacity of almost 25 MW through rural 
households [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Renewable_energy_in_Asia]. 
 
Solar Energy is inexhaustible and pollution free. It is available everywhere; but the greatest 
amount is available between two broad band’s encircling the earth between 15 degree and 35 
degree latitude north and south [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/zero_energy_building]. Fortunately, 
being in the location of 20.30-26.38 degrees north latitude and 88.04-92.44 degree east longitude 
has made Bangladesh one of the ideal locations for utilization of solar energy. 
 
Grameen Shakti is the largest organization installing rural based solar home system (SHS) in 
Bangladesh. Rahimafrooz is a major supplier of high quality solar batteries and other solar 
components. A company named Digital Technology is doing research and development of solar 
PV products like solar billboard lighting, mini grid system for irrigation etc. The main limitations 
of these companies are that they have no specific research on the reduction of energy 
consumption or to reduce the cost of renewable energy system. They are only supplying the 
system that a customer demands. 
 
But without the minimization of energy demand and energy losses in the daily use, it is not 
possible to supply all the energy required for a building by renewable energy technology. The 
Zero Energy Building (ZEB) can be achieved by the minimization of losses and increasing the 
thermal performance by locally available materials. From this consideration ETHE (Earth Tube 
Heat Exchanger) system can be a good alternative. 
 
3. Design criteria of ZEB 
 
3.1 Building specification 
 
In the step of choosing type and shape of a building, a designer has to be very careful. Shape and 
size largely dominate the energy requirements. When a building is square in shape, it will 
consume more energy for lighting than heating and cooling. When it’s one dimension is larger 
1342 
 
than the other, it will consume more energy for cooling than for lighting. Perfect selection of a 
building type reduce the energy consumption, thus reduce the energy demand that has to be 
supplied. From the previous research work it can be seen that nearly square shaped building is 
more energy efficient than other shapes. 
 
3.2 Selection of construction materials 
 
Making a good choice of construction materials can save huge amount of money, which viably 
helps the financing of the renewable energy technology. The use of hollow blocks and insulated 
glass unit (IGU) in a building make the building lighter and simultaneously save initial 
construction cost.  
 
3.3 Energy Equipment used 
 
There are various renewable energy equipments and techniques are available. In case of 
Bangladesh the solar energy technology is most cost effective in comparison to the other energy 
supply systems. However, the system requires huge storage capacity with relatively low 
efficiency. So for a developing country like Bangladesh it is not easy to accommodate this extra 
cost. Hence, on grid solar technology could be the best option. 
 
3.4 Temperature control 
 
Worldwide used HVAC (Heating, ventilation and air conditioning) technology is too much 
expensive for common classed building of Bangladesh. But as we know the temperature below 
the ground is nearly constant at about 55oF, it may be best option to use this stable temperature to 
reduce the variation of room temperature by a simple Earth Tube Heat Exchange (ETHE) 
technique. This technique will keep our rooms relatively hotter in winter and colder in summer. 
In that way electricity load for cooling in summer and heating in winter can be reduced. Some 
selected construction materials itself is a good option to control room temperature. 
 
3.5 Day Lighting 
 
Day lighting is the illumination of interior spaces with sunlight. Physiological, environmental and 
economic benefits of day lighting are really appreciable for a ZEB and it is proposed that day 
lighting be considered for all new building designs. Good day lighting design provides 
appropriate amounts of light without creating excessive glare.  
 
3.6 Solar hot water 
 
Solar water heating systems use solar panels, called collectors, fitted to a building’s roof. These 
collectors get heat from the sun and use it to heat up water, which is stored in a hot water 
cylinder. A boiler or immersion heater can be used as a back-up to heat the water further to reach 
the temperature anyone wants. The system works all through a year, though some heating of 
water is needed with a boiler or immersion heater during the winter months. Once the initial setup 
has been constructed, the system generally works fine and almost freely using the free sunlight. 
Moreover, solar hot water is green and renewable heating system, and control carbon emissions. 
 
1343 
 
3.7 Grid connection 
 
A ZEB typically uses traditional energy sources such as the electric and natural gas utilities when 
on-site generation does not meet the loads. When the on-site generation is greater than the 
building’s loads, excess electricity is exported to the utility grid. By using the grid to account for 
the energy balance, excess production can offset later energy use. Achieving a ZEB without the 
grid would be very difficult and costly due to the additional storage system. Despite the electric 
energy independence of off-grid buildings, they usually rely on outside energy sources such as 
propane (and other fuels) for cooking, space heating, water heating, and backup generators. Off-
grid buildings cannot feed their excess energy production back onto the grid to offset other 
energy uses. As a result, the energy production from renewable resources must be oversized. In 
many cases (especially during the summer), excess generated energy cannot be used. In a 
developing country like Bangladesh, if the building owners have to spend a lot of money for this 
storage techniques they will lose the interest of making their building zero energy. Figure 1 
shows typical overview of an on grid ZEB system. 
 
4. Design details of ZEB 
 
The design concept is developed based on some principals as written below, which are simple in 
application: 
 Design a building in accordance with the surrounding environment 
 Take advantage of sunlight 
 Increase the thermal protection of the building 
 Use controlled ventilation and air-make packaging structures 
 Select the optimal resource to meet the needs of the residual heat 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1 Schematic outline of a zero energy building (ZEB) with grid connection. 
1344 
 
 Choose low temperature heating system for heat distribution, choose energy-
efficient hot water production 
 Learn how to “use” this type of building 
 
4.1 Materials detailing 
 
For wall: 
In the step of structural design hollow blocks were used for wall. Dimension of hollow blocks, 
used for ZEB, for 5″ wall is 15.35″ x 7.48″ x 3.93″ and for 10″ wall is 15.35″ x 7.48″ x 5.51″.  
 
For windows: 
In the windows Insulated Glass Unit (IGU), as shown in fig 2, is used. Most IGUs consist of two 
panes of glass (lites) connected by a spacer that encloses a space between the glass. Triple glazed 
IGUs are also available and offer improved energy efficiency over double glazed IGUs.  
 
The reasons of the selection of these two materials were that, they give better thermal 
performance and at the same time they reduce building weight. Thus, the construction cost could 
be reduced. It can be seen that building constructed with hollow blocks have 25 times less 
thermal conductivity than constructed with bricks. 
 
4.2 Temperature controlling equipments 
 
Depths below around four feet from the ground level, temperature generally found of constant 
50o ~ 55o F all through the year. For controlling inner room temperature, instead of HVAC 
system, a system is used in ZEB using uPVC pipe network. The inlet point is situated at the lower 
portion of the wall and the outlet point is at the upper portion of the wall. At the beginning, the 
outlet is attached with a 12V DC fan (2000-5000 rpm) to receive the air from the room to deliver 
through the pipe network. This system is called Earth Tube Heat Exchanger (ETHE). Rahman 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2 Typical cross-sectional view of insulated glass unit (IGU). 
 
1345 
 
(2011) found that in winter using the system warms up the ambient (cold) air by as much as 100C 
at night and in summer cools the ambient (hot) air also by as much as 120C during the day.  
 
4.3 Day lighting design 
 
With the advent of electric lighting, modern architecture has got freedom to the constraint of 
placing work areas near windows. This has allowed buildings of thick cross-sections to be built, 
providing a high ratio of internal volume to exterior surface area. Such a building geometry is 
thought to reduce heating and cooling loads per unit volume due to temperature differences 
across the building envelope and solar gains transmitted through the glazing. But the lightings are 
fully dependent on the electricity. The day lighting design of buildings is a smart solution to 
reduce the energy use. For the implementation of day lighting design Monte Carlo Day Lighting 
Design method is proposed for ZEB (as shown in Fig 3). In this design method a system of light 
shelf tilt is used for day lighting with accordance with the following criteria: 
 
 Maximize light transmission per unit area of glazing 
 Control direct sunlight penetration onto the work plane 
 Control brightness contrast within the occupant’s visual field 
 Minimize reduction of work plane luminance resulting from low window placement 
 Minimize conductive heat loss and gain 
 
Jonathan (1995) found that for commercial building this method will be more effective. Using 
this method, a multi-story commercial office building can reduce around 70% of its energy 
consumption for lighting. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1346 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3 Day lighting system for ZEB [after Jonathan, 1995.] 
 
4.4 Hot water 
 
In zero energy Building design for Bangladesh generally the hot water system is considered as 
additional. Because the practice of hot water use is not quite popular enough to give a focus on 
the issue except winter season. Evacuated tube solar hot water system is preferable for 
Bangladesh. The benefits of solar hot water are as below:  
 Hot water throughout the year: the system works all year round, though it is needed to 
heat the water further with a boiler or immersion heater during the winter months. 
 Cut electric bills: sunlight is free, so once it is paid for the initial installation hot water 
costs/ energy required for heating will be reduced. 
 Cut carbon footprint: solar hot water is a green, renewable heating system and can 
reduce carbon dioxide emissions 
 
4.5 Proposed ZEB model for Bangladesh 
 
Using the design steps described in the previous sections, the proposed model of ZEB for 
Bangladesh is shown in fig 4. In roof an inclined solar panel is placed. The ETHE is colored in 
red and green. The red color indicates the received air from the room and the green color 
represents the modified air. The net meter shown in the figure is always monitoring the supply to 
the grid and the amount of the units that is received from the grid. Inverter is used to covert 
AC/DC and the service distribution panel ensures the good electric network to ensure 
uninterrupted services to whole building. The whole system is installed with the existing grid 
network. Typical floor plan is shown in the fig to have a better understanding about the design. In 
the proposed building both residential and commercial use is considered as same floor plan. The 
only difference will be some partition wall and electricity load.  
 
5. Cost Comparison 
 
As the weight of the hollow block is less than the weight of the as usual bricks, so buildings with 
hollow blocks consumes less steel. Approximately 11.5% of the total construction cost could be 
reduced using hollow blocks. The buildings, designed with special care with ZEB consideration 
as described earlier, require 40% less energy than the traditional buildings. Construction of a 
1347 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4 Proposed model of ZEB (left panel) with floor plan (right panel) considered for this 
study. 
 
Table 1: Comparison of cost between ZEB and casual Building 
 
 
All amounts 
are in BDT 
Construction 
cost  
(without 
special 
consideration) 
Renewable 
energy system 
cost (without 
minimization 
of energy 
demand) 
Savings 
(with hollow 
blocks) 
Renewable 
energy 
system cost 
(with 
consideration 
of ZEB) 
Additional 
Investment 
needed in a 
ZEB 
Residential 
Building 
19,958,400.00 6,700,000.00 2,300,000.00 4,032,000.00 1,732,000.00 
Commercial 
Building 
21,384,400.00 10,400,000.00 2,460,000.00 4,989,600.00 2,529,600.00 
 
Zero Energy Building (ZEB) is not easy because of its huge initial cost. Calculation says that if 
we made no special attention the design and want to meet the demand by renewable energy that 
will cost at least almost 6700000.00 BDT for residential building of 6 stories (floor plan is shown 
in Fig 4) and almost 10400000.00 BDT for a commercial building of equal floor space of the 
residential building. With a consideration of standard sun hour is 4.7 hrs on Bangladesh designed 
1348 
 
specification of solar panels was 42V, 195 Watts. Simple calculation 
[http://www.altestore.com/store/calculators/on_grid_calculator] shows that additional investment 
of 1732000.00 BDT can replace the electric bills of 20 years for a six storied residential building. 
In the design phase the residential zero energy building was required 75 panels of each 13.06 sft 
and for commercial zero energy building 93 panels, where without energy consumption 
minimization this number was 125 and 195 respectively. Maximum solar equipments have a 
warranty of 20 years. So, this additional investment replaces the electricity bills of 20 years. 
Comparison of costs is summarized in Table 1. 
  
6. Conclusion 
 
Zero Energy Building (ZEB) may be a good solution for the mitigation of energy crisis of 
Bangladesh. But without the proper zero energy design the target will never be achieved. In this 
study it is tried to make buildings more energy efficient through the perfect combination of some 
common local techniques and the use of some alternative materials. Use of the hollow blocks 
reduced the construction cost greatly. The use of ETHE greatly reduced the electricity load for 
cooling and heating. Not only that ETHE system made the internal room temperature relatively 
stable than the casual building. Day lighting design reduces the electricity load for illumination 
tremendously. With the advancement of technology the whole world is being less dependent on 
fossil fuel. If we can make zero energy building, the building will never be a burden to the 
national supply grid which is necessary for sustainable development of Bangladesh. 
 
References 
 
Jonathan R. M. 1995. Day lighting Design via Monte Carlo. Thesis of M.Sc. Department of 
Mechanical Engineering. Colorado State University. 
Rohman, M M. Hasan , M R .Structural Design of a Ten Storied Residential Building and          
comparison of using Normal Brick and Hollow Brick. Undergrad thesis. Dept. of Civil and 
Environmental Engineering.SUST. July 2011. 
Rahman, M M. Design, Construction and Testing of an Earth Tube Heat Exchanger (ETHE). 
Proceedings of Engineering Research, Innovation and Education (CERIE-2011), January 11-
13, 2011.page:779-782. 
Torcellini, P. & Crawley, D, [2006]. Understanding Zero-Energy Buildings. ASHRAE Journal 
September 2006, Vol. 48 Issue 9, pp. 62-69. 
 
1349 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
DESIGN AND FEATURE OF A UNIVERSAL  
RESPIROMETRIC DEVICE FABRICATED AT SUST 
 
 
M.S. Rahman1and M.A. Islam2 
 
 
ABSTRACT: A universal respirometric device for measuring oxygen consumption by 
wastewater samples, solid waste materials, plants and animals is described. A closed reaction 
chamber is provided with an oxygen-sensing probe and an open end liquid manometer is placed 
in a temperature control unit to evaluate the oxygen concentration constantly either in the 
headspace of the vessel or in the samples contained in the slurry within the vessel. An air 
diffusing pump is incorporated to supply oxygen in the reactor and a reverse mode peristaltic 
pump is integrated for recirculation of fluid within the reactor. The wastewater sample is agitated 
using a magnetic stirrer. Experimental data are continually processed in computer through data 
logger. Biodegradation characteristics of any types of sample can be explicitly monitored and 
analyzed through the device. 
 
Keywords: Universal device, Biodegradation, Manometer, Dissolve oxygen, Headspace gas, 
Peristaltic pump, Water heater, Air diffuser 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Respirometer measures the respiration rate of living organisms. In the context of environmental 
science and engineering, respirometers have been used to monitor the metabolic reactions of 
microorganisms in aqueous media, samples of soil and compost, and plants and animals. 
Commercially available or user-built respirometer systems fall into two major categories namely 
1) headspace gas respirometer and 2) dissolve oxygen depletion respirometer (James, 2004). The 
BIOSUST universal respirometer (Model no: URES-BS201) is a specially designed device 
fabricated at SUST to measure oxygen consumption pattern in both aerial and liquid phase in 
form of batch and continuous feeding system. 
 
2. Description of the apparatus 
 
The construction details of the respirometer can be seen in fig. 1 and 2 while table 1 represents 
some technical specifications. The BIOSUST universal respirometer consists of five major parts 
i.e. 1) Temperature control unit with Magnetic stirrer 2) Reactor unit 3) Meter unit 4) Data 
                                                        
1Assistant Professor, Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, SUST, Sylhet, Bangladesh.  
msr.ceesust@gmail.com  
2Professor, Department of Chemical Engineering and Polymer Science, SUST, Sylhet, Bangladesh.  
mislam@sust.edu 
1350 
 
storage and processing unit 5) Supporting accessories i.e. peristaltic pump, feed tank and air 
diffuser 
 
2.1. Temperature control unit with Magnetic stirrer 
 
The body structure of this unit is made of 18 gauge metal sheet with a white coating surface. A 
5mm thick glass reservoir of “L” shaped is placed within the unit with an automatic aquarium 
water heater of 50 watt to serve as a temperature control unit for the respiration cells. Magnetic 
stirrer is placed on the bottom part of the unit. An electric multi-plug is connected to the back 
inner surface of the unit to supply AC/DC current to the magnetic stirrer, water heater, peristaltic 
pump and air diffuser from a 220 AC source.  
 
 
 
Figure 1: BIOSUST universal respirometer (Model no-URES-BS-201) 
 
2.2. Reactor unit 
 
It consists of a food grade air sealed plastic jar with some inlet and outlet connectors. Two probes 
with polarographic oxygen sensors are inserted in the jar. One of them acts to measure the aerial 
oxygen percentage of the closed reactor while the other measures the dissolve oxygen 
concentration in liquid phase of the sample. A small plastic tube is placed inside the jar to serve 
as a reservoir of CO2 scrubber.  
 
2.3. Meter unit 
 
There are three types of measuring meters such as 1) Dissolve oxygen meter and 2) Aerial 
oxygen concentration meter 3) Liquid manometer. Aerial oxygen consumption rate is measured 
directly from the manometer in terms of volume (ml) while dissolve oxygen concentration and 
temperature is monitored through the DO meter. The headspace oxygen concentration in the 
reactor is measured by the oxygen sensing meter (Gnaiger, et al., 1983). 
1351 
 
 
 
Figure 2 Test reactor (a), liquid manometer (b) and polarographic oxygen sensing meter (c) 
 
2.4. Data storage and processing unit 
 
A second generation laptop computer (HP, Pavilion g6 series) is integrated with the respirometer 
to storage the aerial and dissolves oxygen concentration values of different experiments with the 
aid of data logging software (Lutron SW 801). Experimental observations are analyzed with 
different data processing softwares.  
 
Table 1: Technical specifications of BIOSUST universal respirometer 
 
Measuring principle Respirometric (by manometer and polarographic oxygen sensor) 
Measuring range Approx. 15 ml (manometer) 
Approx. 0-20 mg/L (DO meter) 
Manometric liquid Color solution (red) 
Discharge capacity 250 ml/min (peristaltic pump) 
Automatic water heater Weipro (brand name), HA-50W, Submersible, 18-32°C ±1°C 
Single head reverse mode 
peristaltic pump 
Single roller type, 9 volt DC Motor (input voltage 220-240 V 
AC), 6mm Silicon Tube 
Power supply Input: 230 V AC 
Weight  Approx. 20 kg 
 
2.5. Supporting accessories i.e. peristaltic pump, feed tank and air diffuser 
 
To serve as supporting device for the BIOSUST biomonitoring system, there are three important 
secondary tools such as peristaltic pump, feed tank and air diffuser. Peristaltic pump acts to 
supply and discharge liquid solution to the reactor (Rahman, et al., 2011). Feed tank is a reservoir 
from which different nutrients and specific solutions are supplied to the main reactor. The main 
job of the air diffuser is to provide aeration both in the headspace and liquid phase of the reactor. 
1352 
 
3. Features 
 
3.1. Measuring principle  
 
Measuring techniques for the respiration rate can be classified into eight basic principles 
according to two criteria: (1) the phase where oxygen concentration is measured (gas or liquid, G 
and L, respectively) and (2) whether or not there is input and output of liquid and gas (flowing or 
static, F and S, respectively). The operation of all existing respirometers can be explained in 
terms of these criteria (Peter, 2002). Fig. 3 shows a generic scheme of eight operation criteria of 
BIOSUST universal respirometer. 
 
    
Liquid phase principle 
Flowing gas, Flowing 
liquid (LFF) 
Liquid phase principle 
Static gas, Static 
Liquid (LSS) 
Liquid phase principle 
Flowing gas, Static 
liquid (LFS) 
Liquid phase principle 
Static gas, Flowing 
liquid (LSF) 
 
    
Gas phase principle 
Flowing gas, Flowing 
liquid (GFF) 
Gas phase principle 
Static gas, Static 
Liquid (GSS) 
Gas phase principle 
Flowing gas, Static 
liquid (GFS) 
Gas phase principle 
Static gas, Flowing 
liquid (GSF) 
 
Figure 3 Different liquid and gas phase principles (Peter, 2002) 
 
3.2. Measured and deduced variable 
  
From the application of the respirometer, generally three types of variable are recorded such as 1) 
oxygen concentration in the gas phase and that in liquid phase, 2) elapsed time and 3) reactor 
temperature. All these data are plotted to produce respirogram for a certain sample. Fig. 4 to 7 
show some typical respirograms obtained at different experimental conditions for a number of 
test samples. 
1353 
 
 
Figure 4 Typical respirogram showing Cumulative oxygen uptake (COU) in gas phase 
 
 
 
Figure 5 Typical dissolve oxygen concentration profile (DOF) in liquid phase 
 
 
Figure 6 Typical respirogram showing oxygen uptake rate in liquid phase 
1354 
 
 
 
Figure 7 Typical respirogram showing oxygen consumption rate in aerial phase 
 
4. Conclusions  
 
Both the aerial and liquid respirometry offers a great advantage in compare to the conventional 
analytical method of BOD determination (Rahman, et al., 2011). However oxygen diffusivity 
from the gas phase to liquid phase along with the thermobarometric change and extent of 
sample agitation during the experiment exert a profound effect on the test result (Rahman, et 
al., 2011). Calibration and other modification works is on process to launch a program of 
extensive data collection and analysis based on respirometric bioassay the BIOSUST 
respirometer. 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
This study has been supported by the research funds of Shahjalal University of Science and 
Technology and Centre for Environmental Process Engineering, CEP, Sylhet, Bangladesh. M.S. 
Rahman acknowledges NSICT fellowship awarded by Ministry of Science and Information & 
Communication Technology, Government of Bangladesh.  
 
References  
 
Gnaiger, E. and Forstner, H. (1983),  Polarographic Oxygen Sensors. Aquatic and Physiological 
Applications. New York: Springer-Verlag.  
Manual of DO meter, Lutron Electronics, Taiwan. 
Peter, A. (2002), Principles of Respirometry in Activated Sludge Wastewater Treatment, 
University of Gent, Belgium. 
Rahman, M.S. and Islam, M.A. (2011), Design and application of a multi reactor headspace gas    
respirometer in wastewater bioassay, Proceedings of the International Conference on 
Environmental Technology & Construction Engineering for Sustainable Development, 
ICETCESD-2011, March 10-12, 2011, SUST, Sylhet, Bangladesh. pp. 811-814. 
Young, J.C. (2004), Respirometry for Environmental Science and Engineering, SJ Ent., USA. 
1355 
 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
SUSTAINABLE MANAGEMENT IN WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM IN RAJSHAHI CITY, 
BANGLADESH 
 
 
S. M. Helal Uddin1, Md. Golam Mostafa2, A. B. M. Hamidul Haque3, Md. Redwanur Rahman4 
and Md. Belal Hossin Sikder5 
 
 
ABSTRACT: The study explores the opportunity and feasibility of utilizing Padma river water 
and rain water as secondary resource. Groundwater is the single source of potable water supply in 
Rajshahi City. Groundwater level depletion and groundwater is vulnerable to contamination from 
Fe, Mn, As, Pb, Hardness, TSS. As 87% of supply water comes from groundwater. At present 
water supply in the city is only about 32,000m3/day out of total demand of 85000m3/day. By 2020 
the demand of water would be 240000m3/day. Since meet the present and future demand a search 
for alternative water resource is critical. So, only depend on groundwater would fail to meet this 
demand or to meet this demand subsequent water layer depletion and groundwater quality would 
be severe detoraited. Now Padma River water is contaminated from various sources such as 
drainage water, bathing animal. Rainwater harvesting practicing is not found in the study area. 
Padma river water collect and after small scale treatment, it contribute 40% water in the 
distribution system. Along with proper rainwater harvesting may contribute 15% of water supply, 
respectively.  It has, therefore, become imperative to accomplishment the supply of groundwater, 
Padma river water and rainwater for sustainable management of domestic water supply system in 
Rajshahi City, Bangladesh. 
 
1. Introduction 
 
The importance of water is underscored by the fact that many great civilizations in the past 
sprang up along or near water bodies. The participants on the 1st World Water Forum in 
Marrakech in 1997 called for a World Water Vision to increase awareness of the water crisis 
throughout the population and to develop a widely shared plan for bringing about sustainable use 
and development of water resources (Gallopin and Rijsberman, 2003). In developing countries, 
most of which have huge debt burdens, population explosion and moderate to rapid urbanization, 
people have little or no option but to accept water sources of doubtful quality, due to lack of 
better alternative sources, or due to economic and technological constraints to treat the available 
water adequately before use (Aina and Adedipe, 1996; Calamari and Naeve, 1994). The scarcity 
                                                        
1Ph. D Fellow, Institute of Environmental Science, University of Rajshahi, Rajshahi-6205, Bangladesh.  
 Email: helaluddin_ies07@yahoo.com  
2Associate Professor, Institute of Environmental Science, University of Rajshahi, Bangladesh.  
3Associate Professor, Department of Chemistry,  University of Rajshahi, Rajshahi-6205, Bangladesh.  
4Assistant Professor, Institute of Environmental Science, University of Rajshahi, Bangladesh. 
5Assistant Professor, Department of Food Engineering  & Tea Technology, SUST, Sylhet, Bangladesh.  
1356 
 
of clean water and pollution of fresh water has therefore led to a situation in which one-fifth of 
the urban dwellers in developing countries and three quarters of their rural dwelling population 
do not have access to reasonably safe water supplies (Lloyd and Helmer, 1992). For example, in 
Bangladesh, it is estimated that only 85% of the inhabitants of the urban and semi urban areas 
and 85% of rural areas inhabitants have access to potable water supply (Economic Report, 2011). 
The development of water resources has often been used as a yardstick for socioeconomic and 
health status of many nations worldwide.  
 
The safe drinking water plays an important role for the development of good health condition of a 
nation. The World Health Organization (WHO) states that water containing many types of 
impurities from various sources causes different types of water borne diseases and each year 
millions of people suffer from such diseases due to unsafe drinking water supplies. Most of the 
developing countries have limited access to safe water for household uses. Recently water 
demand is tremendously increasing due to economic development and population growth. Water 
is super abundant on the planet as a whole, but fresh potable water is not always available at the 
right time or the right place for human or ecosystem use. Groundwater resources are in many 
parts of the world the only source for private domestic, agricultural and public water supply. 
Subsurface has also become major recipient of wastewater and solid waters especially in the 
developing countries. Overexploitation of groundwater and groundwater layer depletion are 
among the main problems related to groundwater resources assessment and management in 
Rajshahi City, Bangladesh. Groundwater is the only available water type in the region that is 
being provided to all parts of the City for agriculture, industry and human supply. The estimation 
of the amount of recharge or the quantification of the water resources is fundamental for the 
sustainable management of the hydrological resources. As an alternative to a merely 
hydrodynamic approach, geochemical and isotopic investigations of the aquifer systems have 
often proven to be quite successful in determining groundwater recharge, flow paths and renewal 
times in arid and semi-arid regions (Edmunds and Walton, 1980; Salem et al., 1980; Cook and 
Walker, 1996; Ojeda, 2001; Weyhenmeyer, 2002). However, pollution of waters often negates the 
benefits obtained from the development of these water resources. In monsoon period of 
Bangladesh, the country gets huge amount of rainwater that challenges rainwater management. It 
can be used to recharge underground aquifers, construct catchments for irrigation and as well as 
domestic purposes. The water of Rajshahi City is being polluted/contaminated through 
various/process ways. Toxic metals and harmful bacteria are present in the water of the city. Also 
the level of arsenic is above the human acceptable limit (0.05 mg/l) in various locations of 
shallow sub-surface water (Rahman, 2002; Ghosh, 2004). All the surface water bodies are linked 
with drains which are connected with most of the latrines and waste discharge canal of houses. 
There are 149 industries in the BSIC industrial area of Rajshahi City also falls their waste in the 
Padma river through drain. From these industries, waste discharges into the surface water. Sewer 
water is directly fall on the Padma River through drain. As a result, surface water is being 
polluted by the sewer, wastes etc. The present study has made a short summary and reviewed the 
groundwater, surface water and rainwater supply in Rajshahi City. This presentation is 
emphasized the need of monsoon rainwater management, surface water supply with small scale 
treatment along with the groundwater supply to meet the demand and sustainable management of 
water resources in the study area. 
 
 
 
1357 
 
1. Methodology 
 
1.1 Study area 
 
The study area is Rajshahi City, which is the divisional headquarters of Rajshahi Division as well 
as the administrative district in shown in figure 1. It lies between 24° 21‘ and 24° 25‘ north 
latitudes and between 88° 32‘ and 88° 40‘ east longitudes. Rajshahi is located in the north-west 
of the country and has an estimated population of around 772000 people (RCC website). It 
consists of 30 wards with a total area of 96.69 km2 and is situated on the northern banks of the 
river Padma (the downstream of the Ganges river in India). The city is bounded on the east, north 
and west by Paba thana and on the south by the Padma river and the shape of the city is as like an 
inverted “T”. The maximum length along east-west direction is about 13 km and along north-
south is 8 km. The climate of the city is generally marked with monsoons, high temperature, 
considerable humidity and moderate rainfall. The minimum temperature varies from year to year 
from between 10°C to 27°C in winter and the maximum temperature varies between 24°C to 
36°C in summer. During April and May the city experiences the highest temperature. It has a 
mean annual rainfall of below 1446 mm compared to a national average of 2540 mm (BBS, 
2005). 
 
Figure 1 Map of the Rajshahi City 
 
 
1358 
 
2.1. Data collection 
 
Both primary and secondary data have been collected to conduct this study. Primary data 
collected through field survey. The authors are from Rajshahi and their personal observation, 
living, and discussion with the professionals are other sources of primary data. Secondary data 
have been collected from different sources like journals, books, published documents and the 
Internet. 
 
2. Discussion 
 
2.1 Water supply in Rajshahi City 
  
The Rajshahi water supply system was installed in 1937 by the water supply section of the 
Ministry of Works, Calcutta, India. The system had more than 100 street water reservoirs locally 
known as Dhopekal, each with a capacity of 470 gallons. In Rajshahi City there are 1750 
community water stand-posts, 85 on-street water stands, 47 communal reservoirs and 4 water 
treatment works (Table 1). 
 
Table 1 Demand, supply and deficit of water in Rajshahi City 
 
 
RCC has provided around 20000 water supply connections from 45 pumps. Now, Rajshahi 
WASA has established in front of BDR camp which is responsible authority for water supply. In 
addition to this Rajshahi University, Rajshahi Medical College, RUET, Rajshahi College, RDA 
and some other organizations have their own water supplies (RDA, 2004). Current water demand 
for the city is 103000m3/day and supply is 71730 m3/day. If we consider the growth of the 
population, the demand of water would be 240000 m3/day by 2020 (AQUA, 1994). About 55% of 
the population has access to pipe water and the rest take water from hand tube wells in the 
municipal area. About 69% water supply in the City area. The quality of groundwater in the 
Rajshahi City is not suitable for drinking purpose due to excessive contamination from Ca, Fe, 
Mn, As, Pb, hardness, TSS (Helal Uddin et al, 2011). So, the quantity and quality of groundwater 
in Rajshahi City area is not fulfill the people’s aspirations. Word based shallow and semi deep 
tube wells numbers of RCC are shown in Table 2. 
Item Position 
Present water demand (m3/day)  103000 
Present piped water supply (m3/day)  
Deficit after piped water supply (m3/day) 
Percentage of water supply 
Number of withdraw pumps 
Pipe line length (km) 
Number of hand tube well (shallow & deep) 
Number of communal reservoirs 
Water treatment plans 
No. of Stand post 
Number of house connections 
House connection per km. of pipe line  
71070 
31930 
69% 
51 
512 
3789 
47 
4 
1750 
1200 
34.45 
1359 
 
Table 2 Word based shallow and semi deep tube wells numbers of RCC 
  
Word No.  Shallow tube wells Semi deep tube wells  Total tube wells 
1  122 15  137 
2  137 62  199 
3  108 24  132 
4  7 110  117 
5  38 40  76 
6  60 52  112 
7  21 72  93 
8  7 53  60 
9  1 39  40 
10  10 40  50 
11  3 63  66 
12  1 71  72 
13  16 82  98 
14  127 60  187 
15  31 60  91 
16  145 30  175 
17  229 23  252 
18  76 94  170 
19  38 101  139 
20  6 65  71 
21  10 65  75 
22  0 58  58 
23  4 57  61 
24  82 40  122 
25  13 70  83 
26  114 40  194 
27  50 49  99 
28  138 92  230 
29  163 123  286 
30  220 62  282 
Total  1937 1852  3789 
 
 
2.2 Surface water supply option 
  
United Nations Environment Programme (1991a) has reported that 75% of the population in 
developing countries lack adequate sanitary facilities and dump most of their waste into the 
nearest water bodies such as streams, rivers, lakes, and estuaries, lagoons and the seas, thereby 
polluting such water body. Consequently, water related diseases such as cholera, typhoid fever, 
1360 
 
hepatitis and dysentery are rampant. In recent times, pollution of rivers in Bangladesh has 
increased steadily. Considering the geographic and topographic aspects, the water of the Padma 
was considered an alternative source of surface water supply. Rajshahi city is situated on the left 
bank of the Padma, one of the greatest rivers of Bangladesh. In dry season the water level of the 
river always have an acceptable limit which will be use for commercial purpose and for the 
recharge of groundwater. From 1976-2005 data of the Padma the average discharge was found 
about 20209 Cumec (Table 3). From the round the year data of the Padma the average discharge 
in dry season was found about 900 Cumec and the lowest discharge was recorded as 401 Cumec 
in April, 1995 (Figure 2).  
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
35000
40000
45000
Jan Fe
b
Ma
rch Ap
ril
Ma
y
Jun
e
Jul
y
Au
gu
st
Se
pte
mb
er
Oc
tob
er
No
ve
mb
er
De
cem
be
r
D
isc
ha
rg
e 
(C
um
ec
)
 
Figure 2 Seasonal variation of discharge of the Padma river 
 
Table 3 Average water discharge (cusec) in Harding Bridge point from 1976 to 2005 (BWDB) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
So, Padma river water is considered an alternative source for the water supply system of the city 
the estimated water demand up to 2020 (24000m3/day) could be met with by extraction of 8.3 
Cumec of water in only 8 hours operation period daily (Rasul and Jahan, 2010). So, 40% of the 
demand of water in the study area extracted from Padma river would be supply in the distribution 
line which may not damage aquatic ecology or navigation. Now, the government has initiated to 
Year Avg. discharge 
(Cusec) 
Year Avg. discharge 
(Cusec) 
Year Avg. discharge 
(Cusec) 
1976 125387 1986 134490 1996 134009 
1977 
1978 
1979 
1980 
1981 
1982 
1983 
1984 
1985 
132563 
169480 
80780 
149074 
122540 
121350 
126589 
136431 
151818 
1987 
1988 
1989 
1990 
1991 
1992 
1993 
1994 
1995 
148203 
138634 
106067 
142808 
106622 
76935 
73132 
112717 
134230 
1997 
1998 
1999 
2000 
2001 
2002 
2003 
2004 
2005 
107232 
178374 
172089 
20209 
135269 
105548 
100106 
124704 
132456 
1361 
 
establish a water plant in the side of Padma river which will be supply in Rajshahi City. But, a 
detailed analysis of surface water should be done especially heavy metal because in the city area 
groundwater contains excessive lead and lead of groundwater may also comes from hydraulic 
connections of Padma river (Helal Uddin et., al, 2011).  
 
2.3 Rainwater harvesting 
 
Rainwater harvesting is the accumulating and storing of rainwater for reuse before it reaches the 
aquifer. It has been used to provide drinking water for livestock, water for irrigation, as well as 
other typical uses. Rainwater collected from the roofs of houses and local institutions can make 
an important contribution to the availability of drinking water. Rainwater harvesting systems can 
be simple to construct from inexpensive local materials, and are potentially successful in most 
habitable locations. Roof rainwater may not be potable and may require treatment before 
consumption. As rainwater rushes from your roof it may carry pollutants, such as mercury from 
coal burning buildings, or bird faeces. Although some rooftop materials may produce rainwater 
that would be harmful to human health as drinking water, it can be useful in flushing toilets, 
washing clothes, watering the garden, and washing cars; these uses alone halve the amount of 
water used by a typical home. Household rainfall catchments systems are appropriate in areas 
with an average rainfall greater than 200 mm per year. In Rajshahi City area May, June, July, 
August and September monthly rainfall above 200mm which is suitable for rainwater harvesting 
(Figure 3).  
 
Annual rainfall=1446 mm
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Jan
uar
y
Fe
bru
ary
Ma
rch Ap
ril
Ma
y
Jun
e
Jul
y
Au
gu
st
Se
pte
mb
er
Oc
tob
or
No
ve
mb
er
De
cem
be
r
A
m
au
nt
 o
f r
ai
nf
al
l (
m
m
)
 
Figure 3 Monthly rainfall (mm) in 2002 in Rajshahi city (Source: BMD) 
 
Rainwater harvesting (RWH), an alternative water supply option, is a common practice in 
countries like Bangladesh where the annual precipitation is high (Sultana, 2007). Around 35.5% 
of the households in coastal areas use RWH method as a source of drinking water due to high 
salinity problems (Hussain and Ziauddin, 1992). Globally, rainwater-harvesting system is used 
for domestic, agriculture, runoff control, air condition etc. since a long time back (Ferdausi and 
Bolkland, 2000). This water is then suggested to be stored in tanks for later use as indoor non-
potable application, such as flushing Water Closets (WC). In Rajshahi, average rainfall is 1446 
mm. Of them, about 14%, 56%, 28%, and 2% of annual rainfalls in pre-monsoon, monsoon, post-
monsoon and winter period (Figure 4).   
1362 
 
 
Figure 4 Seasonally rainfall condition in Rajshahi (Source: BMD) 
 
As rainwater may be contaminated due to pollutants like microscopic germs etc., it is often not 
considered suitable for drinking without treatment.  However, there are many examples of 
rainwater being used for all purposes including drinking. So-called “appropriate technology” as 
solar water disinfection low-cost disinfection options for treatment of stored rainwater for 
drinking. Mostafa and Shafiuzzaman (2010) suggested that the over all quality of the monsoon 
rainwater in Rajshahi City areas samples were found very well and people in this area could be 
use the water for domestic purposes. Currently in China and Brazil, Senegal, Myanmar rooftop 
rainwater harvesting is being practiced for providing drinking water, domestic water, water for 
livestock, water for small irrigation and a way to replenish ground water levels. In Beijing, some 
housing societies are now adding rain water in their main water sources after proper treatment. 
Considering the annual precipitation (1446 mm) and quality aspects, the rainwater will be 
considering secondary source which contribution about 15% of the water supply system in 
Rajshahi City. If 40% and 15% water adds the supply system of Padma and rainwater, 
respectively along with 69% of the present groundwater supply in the Rajshahi City which meets 
the present demand and future demand. In that way the sustainable management of water supply 
system in Rajshahi City meets water demand and improve living standard in Rajshahi City, 
Bangladesh. 
 
3. Conclusion 
 
The study explores the opportunity and feasibility of utilizing Padma river water and rain water 
as secondary resource. Groundwater is the single source of potable water supply in Rajshahi City. 
Groundwater level depletion and groundwater is vulnerable to contamination from Fe, Mn, As, 
Pb, Hardness, TSS. The quantity and quality of groundwater in Rajshahi City area is not fulfill 
the people’s aspirations. As 87% of supply water comes from groundwater. At present water 
supply in the city is only about 32,000m3/day out of total demand of 85000m3/day. By 2020 the 
demand of water would be 240000m3/day. So, only groundwater supply can not meet the demand 
of water in Rajshahi City. Since meet the present and future demand a search for alternative water 
resource is critical. Padma river water is considered an alternative source for the water supply 
system of the City. The study reviews various aspects that 40% and 15% of water would be 
1363 
 
adding the supply system of in Rajshahi City from the Padma and rainwater, respectively.  
Padma and rainwater along with 69% of the present groundwater supply in the Rajshahi City 
which meets the present demand and future demand. It has, therefore, become imperative to 
accomplishment the supply of groundwater, Padma river water and rainwater for sustainable 
management of water supply system in Rajshahi City, Bangladesh.  
 
Acknowledgements 
 
The authors would like acknowledgement Agrist. Md. Mojibor Rahman encouragements for write 
manuscript. 
 
References 
 
Aina,  E.O.A., & Adedipe, N. O. (996). Water Quality Monitoring and Environmental Status in 
Nigeria (p. 239). FEPA Monograph 6, FEPA, Abuja, Nigeria 
Ahmed, M. F. and Rahman,  M. M. (2000). Supply & Sanitation, Rural  and Low Income 
Urban Communities. (ITN-Bangladesh, Center for Water Supply and Waste Management, 
BUET, Dhaka, Bangladesh). 
AQUA. (2004). Feasibility Study and Preparation of Drainage Master Plan for Rajshahi City 
Corporation, Final Report, Aqua Consultant & Associates Ltd., 40, Nayapaltan, Dhaka, 
Bangladesh. 
Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics. (2005). Compendium of Environment Statistics of Bangladesh. 
Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh, Dhaka, Bangladesh. 
Bangladesh Economic Report. (2011). 
Bangladesh Water Development Board. (2004). Water Level and Discharge Data of the River 
Padma (Bangladesh Water Development Board, Rajshahi, Bangladesh). 
Calamari, D. and Naeve, H. (1994). Review of pollution in the African aquatic environment. 
CIFA Technical Paper No. 25, FAO, Rome, pp. 118. 
Cook, P. G. and Walker, G. (1996). Evaluation of the use to estimate groundwater recharge in arid 
and semi-arid environments. In: IAEA (eds) Proceedings of a symposium on isotopes in water 
resources management, vol 1, pp. 367–403. 
Edmunds, W. M. and Walton, N. R. G. (1980). A geochemical and isotopic approach to recharge  
   evaluation in semi-arid zones; past and present. In: Fontes JC (eds) Arid-
zone hydrology investigations with isotope techniques. IAEA, Vienna, pp. 47–68.  
Ferdausi, S. A. and Bolkland, M. W. (2000). Rainwater harvesting for application in rural 
Bangladesh, 26th WEDC Conference, Dhaka, Bangladesh. 
Gallopin, G. C. and  Rijsberman, F. (2004), Three Global Water  Scenarios. International 
Journal of water, 1(1):16-40. 
Helal Uddin, S. M., Mostafa, M. G. and  Haque, A. B. M. H. (2011). Evaluation of groundwater  
  quality and its suitability for drinking purpose in Rajshahi City, Bangladesh. Water Science & T
echnology: Water Supply, 11(5): 545-558.  
Hussain, M. D. and  Ziauddin A. T. M.(1992). Rainwater Harvesting  and Storage Technolo
gies from Bangladesh. Water Lines, 10 (3): 10-12.  
Mostafa, M.G and Shafiuzzaman, S. M.(2008).Potential Use of Monsoon Rainwater for Drin
king Purpose in Bangladesh. Water Practice & Technology,3(3), doi: 10.2166/WPT.2008068. 
Meteorological Department of Bangladesh. (2004). Statistical Yearbook of Bangladesh 2004,pp. 
22-24. 
1364 
 
Lloyd, B. and Helmer, R. (1992). Surveillance of drinking water quality in rural areas. Longman 
Scientific and Technical. New York: Wiley, pp.34-56. 
Ojeda, C. G. (2001). Aquifers recharge estimation at Mesilla Bolson and Guaymas aquifer 
systems, Mexico. In: IAEA-TECDOC-1246, IAEA (eds) Isotope based assessment of 
groundwater renewal in water scarce regions. IAEA, Vienna, pp. 23–44. 
Rasul, M. T. and Jahan, M. S. (2010). Quality of Ground and Surface Water of Rajshahi City 
Area for Sustainable Drinking Water Source. J. Sci. Res. 2 (3): 577-584. 
Rajshahi City Corporation Website (RCC): www.rcc.org.bd. 
Rajshahi Development Authority, RDA. (2004). Rajshahi Metropolitan Development Plan 2004-
2024.Vol.I Structure Plan and Master Plan. Prepared by RDA under the Ministry of Housing  
   and Public Works, Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh.  
Sultana, F. (2007). Sustainable Water Supply: Rainwater Harvesting for Multistoried Residen
tial Apartments in Dhaka, Bangladesh. A master thesis submitted to the Office of  
   Graduate Studies of Texas A&M University, USA. 
Salem, O., Visser, J. H., Dray. M., and Gonfiantini, R. (1980). Groundwater flow patterns in the 
western Libyan Arab Jamahirya evaluated from isotopic data. In: IAEA (eds) Arid-zone 
hydrology, investigations with isotope techniques. IAEA, Vienna, pp. 165–179. 
UNEP (United Nations Enviroment Programme). (1991a). Earthwatch– Global Environment 
Monitoring System. 
Weyhenmeyer, C. E. (2002). Groundwater evolution in an arid coastal region of the Sultanate of 
Oman based on geochemical and isotopic tracers. In: Stober I, Bucher K (eds) Water–rock 
interaction. Water Science and Technology Library, Kluwer, London, pp. 1–38. 
WHO/UNEP Report on Water Quality. Pp.79. 
 
 1365 
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
EFFLUENT TREATMENT PLANT DESIGN FOR A KNITWEAR INDUSTRY 
 
 
Syed Tasnem Mahmood1  
 
 
ABSTRACT: Knitwear factories uses water in the way of its production. The waste that it creates 
need to be treated as it carries hazardous quality for surface water. In this paper a simple biological 
effluent treatment plant is being designed for BOD and TSS removal only of a knitwear industry. In 
this treatment plant a primary clarifier, an aeration tank and a secondary clarifier is being used. The 
design target for BOD removal is to 30mg/L and TSS is 15mg/L. First the characteristics of the 
effluent are being tested in the lab and then the target was set according to the guideline of the DOE. 
As the commercial ETP design samples are not easy to found we took a sample problem from of 
Metcalf and eddy to solve the design target of this effluent treatment plant. After treating the amount 
of dissolved oxygen in water increases in a allowable scale that it was ready to release in the surface 
water body.  
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Water pollution due to discharge of untreated industrial effluent into water bodies is an alarming 
environmental crisis of Bangladesh. Most industries do not have effluent treatment facilities and few 
industries which have these facilities are either not properly designed or operated and monitored 
regularly. With the increase of industries in Bangladesh, the pollution by them is also rising. In that 
situation effluent treatment plant is a necessary step that’s must have to be taken by the authority of 
the industry. A major environmental hazard present in Knitwear industries is the discharge of 
untreated effluent to the environment, causing pollution of nearby soil and water. To mitigate the 
risks from the discharge of untreated water, an effluent treatment plant is required. Effluent must 
meet the national effluent discharge quality standards. The regulations state that these quality 
standards must be ensured from the moment of going into trial production for industrial units. They 
also state that the Department of Environment can undertake spot checks at any time and the 
pollution levels must not exceed these quality standards. Furthermore, the quality standards may be 
enforced in a more stringent manner if considered necessary in view of the environmental conditions 
of a particular situation1. The waste discharge quality standards differ according to the point of 
disposal. So, the standards are different for inland surface water (ponds, tanks, water bodies, water 
holes, canals, river, springs or estuaries); public sewers (any sewer connected with fully combined 
processing plant including primary and secondary treatment); and irrigated land defined as an  
_____________________________ 
1Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, SUST, Sylhet, Bangladesh. tasnem.sust@gmail.com 
 1366 
appropriately irrigated plantation area of specified crops based on quantity and quality of wastewater 
As water passes through the ETP, pollutants are removed and the quality of the water is improved, 
allowing for final discharge to the environment without significant risk. 
 
 
2. Literature review 
 
Knitwear industries produce wastewater, otherwise known as effluent, as a bi-product of their 
production. The effluent contains several pollutants, which can be removed with the help of an 
effluent treatment plant (ETP). The “clean” water can then be safely discharged into the environment. 
Effluent from textile dyeing industries must meet the national effluent discharge quality standards set 
by the Government of Bangladesh, including the “Quality Standards for Classified Industries” and 
may also need to meet additional standards set by international knitwear buyers. Consequently any 
ETP must be designed and operated in such a way that it treats the wastewater to these standards. The 
regulations state that these quality standards must be ensured from the moment of going into trial 
production for industrial units. They also state that the Department of Environment can undertake 
spot checks at any time and the pollution levels must not exceed these quality standards. 
Furthermore, the quality standards may be enforced in a more stringent manner if considered 
necessary in view of the environmental conditions of a particular situation. The waste discharge 
quality standards differ according to the point of disposal. So, the standards are different for inland 
surface water (ponds, tanks, water bodies, water holes, canals, river, springs or estuaries); public 
sewers (any sewer connected with fully combined processing plant including primary and secondary 
treatment); and irrigated land defined as an appropriately irrigated plantation area of specified crops 
based on quantity and quality of wastewater 
    Under the Environmental Conservation Rules 1997, industrial units and projects are classified into 
four categories (Green, Orange A, Orange B, and Red) based on their environmental impact and  
 
Table 1.Wastewater Treatment Levels and Processes 
Treatment Level Description Process 
Preliminary Removal of large solids such 
as rags, sticks, grit and grease 
that may damage equipment or 
result in operational problems 
Physical 
Primary Removal of floating and settle 
able materials such as 
suspended solids and organic 
matter 
Physical & Chemical 
Secondary Removal of biodegradable 
organic matter and suspended 
solids 
Biological and chemical 
Tertiary/advanced Removal of residual 
suspended solids / dissolved 
solids 
Physical, chemical and 
biological 
 
 
 1367 
location. Fabric dyeing and chemical treatment industries fall under the Red category. This means 
that when they are applying for site clearance they must submit an ETP plan to the Department of 
Environment, including the layout and location. 
   Effluent can be treated in a number of different ways depending on the level of treatment required. 
These levels are known as preliminary, primary, secondary and tertiary (or advanced). The 
mechanisms for treatment can be divided into three broad categories: physical, chemical and 
biological, which all include a number of different processes (Table 1). 
 
 
3. Methodology 
 
3.1. Collection of sample 
 
The industrial effluent was collected from the Grammen Knitwear Industry, Savar, Dhaka, 
Bangladesh. It is a knitwear industry with a daily effluent discharge of 1100m3/day. The sample was 
collected for five different time of a day in quest of accuracy. 
 
3.2. Characterization of sample  
 
Lab test was done to characterize the effluent sample. All the testing method was followed by the 
slandered and specific lab test procedure. The lab tests includes BOD5, COD, pH, turbidity, TSS, 
VSS, Cr6+, Cu, total phosphate, total hardness, chloride , N-NO3, N-NH3.  
 
3.3. Setting up the design target and design the ETP 
 
After finding the characteristics of the effluent the design target was set to remove BOD upto 66% 
and TSS upto 85% that allows the limit of DOE. Then the ETP was designed according to the design 
calculation from the “Wastewater Engineering Treatment & Reuse” of Metcalf & Eddy (chapter 8, 
example 8.2). 
 
Parameters Amount present in the 
influent (mg/l) 
Allowable presence 
according to DOE 
(mg/l) 
Target presence in 
the effluent by 
design 
BOD5 90 50 30 
TSS 140 20 15 
 
 
4. Design of ETP 
 
4.1. Design Consideration 
 
Flow Q= 1100m3/day 
BOD5= 90 mg/L 
 1368 
sBOD5 = 45 mg/L 
COD= 170 mg/L 
sCOD= 75 mg/L 
rbCOD= 45 mg/L 
TSS= 140 mg/L 
VSS= 110 mg/L 
 
4.2. Design Assumptions 
1. Fine Bubble ceramic diffusers with an aeration clean water O2 transfer efficiency = 35% 
2. Liquid depth for aeration basin = 4.9m 
3. The point of air release for the ceramic diffusers is 0.5m above the tank bottom. 
4. DO in aeration basin is = 2.0 g/m3 & Site elevation is 500 m (pressure = 93.6kpa) 
5. Aeration α= 0.5, β = 0.95, diffuser fouling factor, F = 0.9 
6. SRT (solids retention time) for BOD removal is 5d. 
7. Design MLSS XTSS concentration is 3000g/m3 
4.3. Design Steps 
 
4.3.1. Step 1: Develop the wastewater characteristics needed for design 
 
a) bCOD= 1.6XBOD=144 g/m3 
b) nbCOD= COD-bCOD 
             =170-144 g/m3 
                     =26 g/m3 
c) SCOD= sCOD-1.6sBOD      =75-72   =3 g/m3 
d) nbVSS= (1-BPCOD/pCOD)VSS 
     =  =  =0.75 
 
           So, nbVSS= (1-0.75) X110 
                      = 26.63 g/m3. 
e) iTSS=TSS-VSS 
             =30 mg/L 
 
 
4.3.2. Step 2: Design suspended growth for suspended removal only: 
 
PXVSS= +  
 1369 
Q= 1100m3/day 
Y= 0.40 g VSS/gbCOD 
S0= bCOD=144 g/m3 
 
S=  
       
Ks=20 g/m3 
µmT=µmθT-20 
so, µm35˚C= 6X(1.07)35-20 
=16.55 g/m3 
  So, KdT= K20θT-20 
=0.12X (1.07)35-20 
=0.33g/d 
 
S=  =0.69 gbCOD/m3 
 
PXVSS=  
        = 29.67 kg VSS/ 
 
 
4.3.3. Step 3: Determination Mass of VSS & TSS in the aeration basin: (assuming no nitrification) 
 
PXVSS=29.67 kg/d+ Q(nb.VSS) 
= 29.67+1100X26.63X (1/1000) 
=58.96 kg/d 
PXTSS= +29.3+1100X30X (1/1000) 
= 97.2 kg/d 
a) i) mass of MLSS 
(XVSS)V= PXVSSXSRT 
=58.9X5=294.5kg 
ii)(XTSS)V= PXTSSXSRT 
=97.2X5=486kg 
 
4.3.4. Step 4: Aeration tank Volume determination & Aeration tank determination time 
 
According to assumption 7, XTSS= 3000g/m3 
Now, 
From the ‘Step 3’ we know, 
 1370 
V (XTSS) = 486kg 
So, the volume of Aeration tank V = =162.83m3 
a) Aeration tank determination time: 
 
=  =  = 3.6 h 
 
 
b) Determination of MLSS: 
 
Fraction VSS =   =  = 0.60 
 
MLVSS = Fraction of VSS X MLSS 
  = 0.60 X 3000 
  = 1800 g/m3 
 
4.3.5. Step 5: Determination of F/M ratio and Volumetric BOD loading 
 
Determine F/M : 
F/M=  =   
 
= 0.34g/g-d = 0.34kg/kg-d 
Volumetric BOD loading: 
 
 =  = 0.61 kg/m3d 
 
 
 
4.3.6. Step 6: Determination of observed yield based on TSS and VSS 
 
Observed yield= gTSS/gbCOD 
                          =kgTSS/kgbCOD 
 
So, PXTSS= 97.2 kg/d 
 
COD removal = Q(So-S) 
                          
          =1100(144-0.69)                         
                       =157.67kg/day 
 1371 
 
Yobs.TSS=   
   
          =  
 
            =   
 
            =   
 
           = 0.97 gTSS/gBOD 
 
Observed yield based on VSS: 
Yobs.TSS.: VSS/TSS= 0.60 [from step 4] 
       
                 =  x  
 
                =0.36gVSS/gbCOD 
 
                =0.36X1.6 
 
                =0.57gVSS/gBOD 
 
4.3.7. Step 7: Calculation the O2 demand 
 
O2 demand: 
       R0= Q(S0-S)-1.42Px,bio 
           = {1100(144-0.69)/1000} – 1.42 X 29.67 
           =157.64-42.12 
           =115.5kg/d 
           =4.81 kg/h 
 
4.3.8. Step 8: Fine bubble aeration design---determination of Air flow rate at average design 
flow rate 
 
AOTR= Actual Oxygen Transfer Rate under field Condition, kg O2/h 
SORT= standard Oxygen transfer rate in tap water at 20°C, and zero    
   dissolved oxygen kg O2/h 
 
 1372 
From table D-1(appendix- of Metcalf & eddy ) 
a) Cŝ,T,H=CS,T,HX0.5X(Pd/Patm + Qt/21) 
C20=9.08 mg/L 
C35 = 6.93 mg/L 
Relative pressure at 10.5m elevation (from sea level) 
Pb/Pa=exp [- ] = exp [- ] 
      =0.998 
So, the oxygen concentration at 10.5m on site elevation at 35˚C is CS,T,H=6.33X0.998 
=6.91 mg/L 
Atmospheric pressure: Patm=  =10.32 
So, O2 concentration 
CSTH=6.92X0.5X[ + ] 
=7.96mg/L 
Determine the SORT 
Assuming, α=0.5 
                    Β=0.95 
Diffuser fouling factor,F=0.9 
SORT= AOTR[ ](1.02420-T) 
=12.24 kg/hr 
 
Determine the air flow rate: 
Air Flow rate kg/min=  
Density of air at 35˚C 
ρa=1.15 kg/ m3 
Pa=0.99X101.325=101.12Kpa 
Weight of O2= 1.15 X 0.2318=0.267 
Air flow rate=  
                        
       = 2.18 m3/min 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1373 
 
 
 
3.3.9 Step 9: Secondary Clarifier Design 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: definition sketch for suspended solid mass balance for return sludge control of secondary 
clarifier 
 
Assume Xr = 8000 g/m3 (Moderate Settling Sludge; as per section 8-3)[Range 4000-12000 g/m3] 
 
R = = 0.6 
 
 Assuming a hydraulic application rate of 22 m3/m2.d at average flow rate for the secondary clarifier., 
the range of 16-28 m3/m2.d 
 
So, Recycle up to 60 % sludge 
 
SAR =  = =50 m 
 
 Clarifier diameter = 7.5m 
 
 
4. Result & Discussion 
 
From the calculation the total design is: 
Design Flow = 45.83m3/hr 
(2) Aeration Tank No. = 01 
Aeration 
Tank 
Secondary 
Clarifier 
Q Q + Q  
X 
Qe 
Xe 
Q
 
X
 
XR 
QR 
System Boundary 
 1374 
(3) Aeration Tank Volume = 162m3 
(4) Hydraulic Retention Time = 3.6 hr. 
(5) MLSS = 3000 g/m3 
(6) MLVSS = 1800 g/m3 
(7) F/M = 0.34 Kg/Kg.d 
(8) Volumetric BOD loading = 0.61 Kg/m3.d 
(9) Sludge Production = 97.2 Kg/d 
(10) Observed Yield = 0.97 g TSS/g. BOD 
                                    = 0.57 gVSS/gBOD 
(11) Oxygen Required = 115.5 Kg/d = 4.81 Kg/hr 
(12) Air flow rate = 2.18 m3/min 
(13) RAS Ratio = 0.60 
(14) SOTR = 12.24 kg /hr 
(15) Secondary Clarifier = 1 No 
 SOR = 22 m3/m2/day 
 Diameter of secondary clarieier = 7.5m 
 
After having this result a lab test was done in the lab for determining the result of Aeration of the 
effluent. The effluent was being aerated for 10 hours and the sample was collected at a two hours 
interval. BOD5 and COD test was done of the samples. The results of the tests are plotting in a graph 
below. It shows that the amount of BOD and COD is decreasing. So Design concept is ok for treating 
this effluent. 
 
 
 
Figure 2: Lab result for BOD5 and COD amount (mg/L) in the effluent after aeration. 
 1375 
Design layout of the effluent treatment plant is given below 
 
Figure 3: Layout of Effluent Treatment Plant 
 
5. Conclusion 
 
The design of this Effluent Treatment Plant is very simple and easily applicable. As it uses only 
aeration tank that’s why the treatment cost will be very low for the implementation of this ETP. As 
this effluent treatment plant increase the amount of dissolve oxygen and remove the suspended solids 
so this design can be used for any types of small and simple industries. As we all know how we 
pollute our water body with the effluent of the industries, so the effluent treatment plant is very 
essentials this day. To protect our natural water body we should take serious steps to establish ETP 
for all the industries. 
 
 
6. Reference 
 
Wastewater Engineering Treatment & Reuse; Metcalf & Eddy      
    Chapter 8, Biological Treatment Plant Design 
M. Akhtaruzzaman, Alexandra Clemett, Jerry Knapp, Mahbubul A. Mahmood, Samiya Ahmed 
     Chossing an Effluent Treatment Plant 
Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh, Ministry of Environment and Forest 
 1376 
    Environmental Conservation Rules 1997    
Department of Environment, Ministry of Environment and Forest, Bangladesh 
   Guide for Assessment of Effluent Treatment Plants 
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, Wastewater Operator Certification 
    Introduction To Activated Sludge Study Guide, December 2010 Edition 
Math Concepts: Wastewater Engineering 
Jehng-Jung Kao, John T. Pfeffer, E. Downey Brill, Jr., James J. Geselbracht, Department of Civil 
Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 
    Workstation environment for wastewater treatment design using al and mathematical models 
Dr. Hongde Zhou, Zebo Long 
    Water and wastewater treatment design 
Cristina Ortega-Castineiras, Karen Kajder, and Reshma Ramoutar 
   Conceptual design of a wastewater treatment plant for the municipality of cotorro, province of havana, cuba 
Department of Chemical Engineering at West Virginia University 
   Design of an acrylic acid production process 
Expert Witness Statement of Mark Trickey, Expert of Wannon Water 
   In the matter of the Shaw River Power Station Project Planning Panels Victoria Proponent: Shaw River 
Power Station Pty Ltd and Wannon Water 
WH Rössle* and WA Pretorius, ERWAT Chair in Wastewater Management, Water Utilisation 
Division, Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Pretoria, 
   A review of characterisation requirements for in-line prefermenters, Paper 1: Wastewater characterisation 
R. Baskar, K.M. Meera Sheriffa Begum, S.Sundaram 
   Characterization and reuse of textile effluent treatment plant Waste sludge in clay bricks 
Kimberly A. Groff 
   Textile wastes 
Adel Al-Kdasi, Azni Idris, Katayon Saed, Chuah Teong Guan 
   Treatment of textile wastewater by advanced Oxidation processes – a review 
 
 
 
 1377
ICETCESD 2012 
March 10-12, 2012, Sylhet, Bangladesh 
 
 
 
DEVELOPMENT OF A NUMERICAL MODEL TO ASSESS THE CONTAMINANT 
TRANSPORT OF THE LAKE KIYANJA WATERSHED, UGANDA 
 
 
M. Tauhid-Ur-Rahman1 Akira Mano2, Keiko Udo3 and Yoshinobu Ishibashi4  
 
 
Introduction: Dispersing of toxic leachates produced usually from the urban solid waste 
dumping site, may pose considerable public health hazards since that get mixed easily with the 
surrounding surface water as well as groundwater system. This present study focuses on 
investigating the prevailing landfill contaminant transport phenomena in the nearby lake Kiyanja 
watershed of the Masindi district of Uganda. A numerical model considering all possible factors 
involved in the hydrogeological processes was developed by using the groundwater modeling 
software, GMS 5.0. to assess the contaminant transport. The model predicts that the contaminant 
may need at least 27 years to get dispersed in the nearby ground water resources.  
 
1. Introduction  
 
Unmanaged landfill has still now been treated as the traditional solution for disposing municipal 
solid wastes in most of the urban communities in Uganda (Fig. 1). In the recent times, there has 
been a growing concern observed in the urban authority about the fate of the groundwater 
resources that have become increasingly threatened by the leaching of contaminants from 
uncontrolled landfills containing industrial or household waste (Langwaldt and Puhakka 2000, 
Rahman et al. 2005, Rahman 2009). It has been recognized that groundwater is one of the 
essential water resources in the Masindi district of Uganda. However, it is an important task to 
locate and manage the points of abstraction of groundwater from its environment in order to 
prevent the groundwater from the nearby uncontrolled landfill leaching (Fig. 1). Groundwater 
flow and contamination transport models comprise a vital tool for the supervision of these 
abstraction points and eventually the preservation and management of this precious water 
resource. In this paper, the groundwater contamination by a landfill, located on the Masindi area, 
has been assessed by developing a numerical model with the Ground Water Modeling System 
(GMS). 
   Computer modeling of contamination transport in groundwater aquifer has now been 
considered by most of the solute transport modelers (Bedient et al 1999). Several leading 
computer models have been developed that can develop model groundwater systems of 
substantial magnitude and complexity. GMS is a graphically based software tool providing 
facility through all aspects of the groundwater flow and transport modeling process (Owen and 
Jones 1994). Moreover, GMS includes a comprehensive graphical interface to the groundwater 
                                                        
1Associate Professor, CEE Department, SUST, Sylhet, Bangladesh. 
2Professor, CEE Department, DPR, DCRC, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan  
3Associate Professor, CEE Department, DPR, DCRC, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan 
4Professor, CEE Department, Tohoku Gakuin University, Tagajo, Japan 
 1378
model MODFLOW 2000, which is again a 3D, cell-centered, finite difference, saturated flow 
model for the simulation of advection, dispersion, and chemical reactions of dissolved 
constituents in groundwater systems (McDonald and Harbaugh, 1988). MT3DMS is utilized in 
combination with MODFLOW in a two step flow and transport simulation, where heads and cell-
by-cell flux terms are worked out by MODFLOW during the flow simulation. 
 
 
Figure 1. (A) A typical solid waste disposal practice is Masindi; (B) An unmanaged waste 
dumping site; (C) People are collecting water from nearby boreholes (Rahman, 2009) 
 
 
2. Study Area 
 
Masindi District is located in the northern part of the western region of Uganda (Fig. 2). It is 
bordered by Luwero and Kiboga districts in the south, Hoima district and the Democratic 
Republic of Congo in the west, while in the north it is bordered by the districts of Gulu, Apac and 
Nebbi (Rahman et al 2005). It extends between latitudes 1°21′-2°24′ North and 31°18′ - 32°21′ 
East (Master Plan’1997). Figure 2 shows a 3D representation of the topography and relief of the 
Lake Kiyanja catchment, generated using Surfer mapping software.  
 
3. Methodology 
3.1 Model Development 
 
3.1.1 Governing Equation for Groundwater Flow 
The governing equation of groundwater flow (Bedient et el. 1999) used in MODFLOW is derived 
from mass conservation and Darcy’s law as follows: 
 
t
hSQ
z
hK
zy
hK
yx
hK
x szzyyxx 































                                    (1)    
 
where Kxx , Kyy , and Kzz are values of hydraulic conductivity along the x, y, and z coordinate axes, 
which are assumed to be parallel to the major axes of hydraulic conductivity (L/T). Parameter h is 
the piezometric head (L). Q is a volumetric flux per unit volume representing sources and (or 
sinks) of water, with Q< 0 for flow out of the groundwater system, and Q>0 for flow in (T- 
 1379
 
MASINDI 
TOWN
LAKE 
KIYANJA
 A  B 
C D 
    h h 
 
 
Figure 2. (A) District map of Uganda; (B) A close view of Masindi district; (C) Boundary of the 
study area; (D) Location of lake Kiyanja watershed 
 
 
1). Ss are the specific storage of the porous media (L-1), and t is time (T).  
Equation (1), when combined with boundary and initial conditions, describes transient 3-
dimensional groundwater flow in a heterogeneous and anisotropic porous medium. (If there are s
ufficient fractures in a fractured aquifer it acts like a porous medium). 
 
3.2.2 Boundary Conditions 
The boundary conditions considered in this groundwater model are generally divided into 
different types that can be mathematically described as follows (Rahman et al. 2005).  
 
Dirichlet conditions 
Prescribed piezometric head,                                                    (2) 
 1380
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Three-dimensional topographical model of Lake Kiyanja Watershed 
 
 
 
Neumann conditions 
Prescribed f                                                                (3) 
 
 
Mixed conditions               
Described as                                                                (4) 
 
 
Phreatic boundary  
Described as:                                                               (5) 
 
Seepage face   
Described as               h = z                                             (6) 
 
where  is the elevation of the phreatic boundary, equal to the water table. Note that nˆ  in the 
above formula represents the normal direction to the considered boundary .  
 
 
 
 
 

 f
n
h
ˆ
 


 f
n
hh
ˆ

 yxh ,
 1381
3.2 MODFLOW Simulation 
 
As a numerical model MODFLOW permits simulating the water flow in the ground water 
aquifers. If the provided data about the boundary condition and domains are accurate, 
MODFLOW can serve as a great enlightening tool. Information like ground saturation, water 
pressure, water flow direction and flow budget in a selected cell of the aquifer can easily be 
obtained with this simulation model. Figure 4 shows a possible conceptual model, with an 
assumed homogenous porosity to aquifer system. Different colors show different properties of the 
cells (portions of aquifer). For example the red colored cells represent dry cells that mean that 
they are unsaturated ground volumes of the aquifer, while the blue cells are the wet cells, which 
have a saturation value equal to 1. Different colors represent different saturation level of the cells, 
where the dark red color is the lowest “dry cell” while the blue is the highest “wet cells”. 
   Due to lack of information on important parameters such as conductivity, porosity, the 
average values of these parameters are taken and fractured aquifer is not considered here. 
 
 
3.3 MT3DMS simulation 
 
Taking a predefined MODFLOW simulation and assigning properties to sources and sinks are the 
main steps in setting up an MT3DMS simulation. Defining the data for the basic transport 
package is the first step in initiating the MT3DMS simulation. Basic Transport package consists 
of information such as stress period, an array defining inactive cells, cells having constant 
concentration, aquifer porosity and a starting concentration values. After specifying the input data 
for an MT3DMS simulation, the model checker is applied to investigate whether the input data is 
defined the simulation correctly. Next to that is to run the MT3DMS using the MT3D menu. In 
the simulation of the MT3DMS, a concentration file for each of the species is created. 
Concentrations are presented in the form of contours, iso-surfaces, cross-sections and time series 
plots after importing the MT3DMS solution. 
 
 
                      Figure 4: Conceptual Model of Lake Kiyanja  
 
 
 1382
 
Figure 5. Specification of GIS objects (polygon for landfill, point for well) 
 
 
3.4 Model Run 
 
Using the Map Module, a polygon was added to the recharge coverage, representing the location 
and extent of the hypothetical landfill (Fig. 5). This polygon was specified as an area recharge 
source, and then a constant recharge rate was assigned to it. Additionally, in order to investigate 
the local impacts of the contaminant transport, a hypothetical well was introduced as a point 
object in the sources (sinks) coverage, in the vicinity of the landfill. Subsequently, parameters of 
MT3DMS were assigned and an MT3DMS simulation was run. 
   The second simulation was relating to the transport of the contaminant in the groundwater 
system. It was assumed that a certain polluting compound with an unidentified concentration was 
released in an uncontrolled way in the permeable soil layers. Then, the contaminant is supposed 
to be transported through convection and dispersion processes in the ground water system, which 
is simulated with function of time. Release of contaminant is expressed by the Fig. 2(a) while 
figures 2(b), (c) and (d) represent the progress of the contaminant after 1.5, 3 and 27 years 
respectively. It can be noticed that initially, higher concentrated contaminant was located in a 
specific area (shown by the red color), but after few years the contaminant was further 
transported by the direction of the flowing water in the saturated soil layers through diffusion 
process and then was dispersed to the surrounding areas. The contaminant was dispersed not only 
in the horizontal direction, but also in the vertical direction (Fig. 2).  
 
4. Discussion and conclusion 
 
The contamination transport model developed in MT3DMS code shows that the contamination 
plume is concentrated mainly in the upper layer which is mostly composed of clay material. This  
 1383
 
Fig. 6. (a) Location of the contaminant; (b) contamination after 1.5 years; (c) contaminant 
migration after 3 years; and (d) migration after a period of 27 years 
 
 
top layer perhaps is a denser one and so it takes the spreading of contamination a longer time to 
infiltrate along the vertical direction. However, the spreading of contamination in the horizontal 
direction shows that after 1.5 years (Fig. 6a), it will start to move towards the selected polygon 
and will further mix with the surface runoff. This polluted surface runoff will eventually continue 
to pollute the surface water of the nearest lakes and streams and also the ground waters of 
boreholes. The expected time that needs the spreading of the contamination out from the landfill, 
was predicted as 27 years (Fig. 6d).  
   The numerical model developed here indicates that, on the regional scale, the potential 
  
  
a b
c d
 1384
contaminants from the landfill should have some adverse impact on the groundwater regime. 
However the contaminant will require at least 27 years to get dispersed in the nearby groundwater 
resources. Considering the preservation of the groundwater system, the landfill should 
immediately be closed and shifted in another farthest location with an arrangement of bottom 
lining and top covering. Moreover, the leachate collection and monitoring arrangement should 
also be planned. 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
The authors express their sincere gratitude to Professor Roger Thunvik, Dept. of Land and Water 
Resources, KTH, Stockholm, Sweden for his great support while carrying out the model 
simulation. The first author is very thankful to SIDA for providing scholarship.   
 
References 
 
Bedient P.B., Rifai, H.S. and Newall, C.J. (1999) Groundwater contamination - transport and 
remediation, Prentice Hall, 604p 
Langwaldt, J.H. and Puhakka, J.A. (2000) On-site biological remediation of contaminated 
groundwater: a review. Environmental Pollution 109 (2000), 353–364  
Owen, S.J. and Jones, N.L. (1994) A Comprehensive Modeling Environment for the Simulation 
of Groundwater Flow and Transport. Engineering Computer Graphics Laboratory, Brigham 
Young University, Prova, UT. 84602, USA. 
  http://www.andrew.cmu.edu/user/sowen/papers/gms/gms.html, Accessed on 10th December, 2008  
Masindi Water Master Plan (1997) Masindi District InteGrated Community Development Project 
(MDICP), Masindi District Administration, The Republic of Uganda. 
Rahman, M. T, Buccheri, M., Kizito, F. and Baghbanan, A. (2005). Development of conceptual 
and numerical modeling of contaminant transport for the lake Kiyanja catchment (Uganda-
Africa). Report submitted to the Dept of Land and Water Resources Engineering KTH, 
Stockholm, Sweden. 
Rahman, M.T. (2009). An investigation of the contaminant transport from the waste disposal site, 
using FEMLAB. Journal of Applied Sciences in Environmental Sanitation. Vol. 4 (2), pp. 79-
88.   
 
