89          
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
Detailed Syllabus
CSE 100 PROJECT WORK
2 Hours/Week, 1 Credit
Project Work Based on CSE 135 / CSE 137.
CSE 101* INTRODUCTION TO COMPUTER APPLICATION
2 Hours/Week, 2 Credits 
Computer Basis: History and development Computer types. Scope of computer Impact of computers on society and technology. 
Specification of Computers: CPU types, Speed variation, Memory, type size Cache, Storage Media, Hard disk, Floppy disk, CD 
ROM , DVD. Printer: Dot matrix Laser, ink jet. Computer Hardware: Digital electronics, CPU. Memory: RAM, ROM, Mass 
storage  devices,  I/O  Devices : Different  Peripherals  Idea  of  System  Software  and  Application  Software: Function  of 
Operating System, Discussion on different types of Operating System : DOS/Windows, Mac UNIX/XENIX etc.  Concept of 
formal Language: Different type of Computer Languages: Assembly, FORTRAN, Pascal C and C++, Artificial Language etc. 
Purpose and Scope of Application Packages:  Essential General purpose packages : Word Processing, Spreadsheet analysis, 
Database etc. Networking: Different types of networks, network topologies, communication media. Internet: Internet services, 

Circuit Models:  Characteristics & applications of linear circuit elements, Ideal and non-ideal sources : Voltage and Current. 
Series, Parallel and Compound circuit analysis. Loading effects: Ammeter and Voltmeter. Circuit Theorem and DC analysis: 
Voltage and current divider rule, Kirchhoff’s Laws. Superposition Theorem. Thevenin’s Theorem. Norton’s Theorem. Maximum 
Power Transfer Theorem. Reciprocity Theorem. Mesh and Nodal analysis. Matrix form of Mesh and Nodal equations. Use of 
Cramer’s rule. Bridge networks. T-Pie and Pie-T Conversions.  Transients and Time Domain analysis: Transient in RC, RL, 
and RLC circuits. Pulse repetition rate and duty cycle. Average value. RC response to a square wave inputs.  AC Theory and 
Frequency domain analysis:  Properties of Sinusoidal and square wave forms. Phasor diagram. The ‘j’ operator. Resonance 
phenomena. Fourier method of Wave form analysis. Laplace’s Transformation and its application to Linear circuit.  Networks: 
Two  port  network  and  its  parameters.  Equivalent  circuits.  Analog  filter  design:  Elementary  filter  theory,  Characteristics 
impedance. Low pass filter, High pass filter, Band-pass filter, Band-elimination filter.  Coupled Circuits and Transformers: 
Self and mutual inductance, Analysis of coupled circuits. Coefficient of coupling, Linear transformer, Ideal Transformer.
CSE 126 ELECTRIC CIRCUITS ANALYSIS LAB
4 Hours/Week, 2 Credits
Laboratory works based on CSE 125.
CSE 131 INTRODUCTION TO COMPUTER SCIENCE
2 Hours/Week , 2 Credits 
Introduction: Fundamentals concepts; historical background; types of computers; application areas. Number systems, codes and 
computer logic:  binary,  octal,  hexadecimal,  number systems;  arithmetic operations;  ASCII,  BCD, EBCDIC, Gray,  weighted 
codes; Boolean functions. Data representation: representation of integer, real, floating-point numbers and character. Hardware: 
Basic components of a digital computer; I/O unit, memory unit and CPU; peripheral devices. Single- and multi-user systems. 
Multitasking systems. Computer communication and networks. Computer Hardware Organization. Bus-organized architecture. 
CPU Organization. Memory devices. Buffers and channels. I/O devices.  Software:  Basic concepts; classification; system and 
application software. Operating system: importance, components, and basic functions; overview of DOS and Unix. Programming 
languages:  classification;  assembler  &  translators;  source  &  object  program.  Phases  of  a  compiler.  Application  software. 
Computers for problem solving:  Programming as transformation from problem to solution to implementation. Programming 
language  and  their  levels.  Programming  language  concepts.  Structured  language  and  other  formalism.  Survey  of  different 
programming languages.  Program design methodologies,  structured and modular program design.  Introduction to software 
packages :Types and uses.
CSE 135 STRUCTURED PROGRAMMING LANGUAGE
2 Hours/Week, 2 Credits 
Programming Language :  Basic concept, Overview of programming languages, Problem Solving Techniques and Data Flow 
Diagram.  C-Language (UNIX Environment): Preliminaries,  Program constructs,  variables  and data  types  in  C.  Input  and 
output.  Character and formatted I/O; Arithmetic Expressions and Assignment statements; Loops and Nested loops; Decision 
making; Arrays, Functions; Arguments and local variables, Calling Functions and arrays. Recursion and Recursive functions; 
Structures within structure. Files; File functions for sequential and Random I/O. Pointers; Pointers and structures; Pointer and 
functions; Pointer and arrays; Operation and Pointer; Pointer and memory addresses; Operations on Bits; Bit Operation; Bit field; 
Advanced features; Standard and library. 
CSE 136 STRUCTURED PROGRAMMING LANGUAGE LAB (UNIX Environment)
6 Hours /week, 3 Credits
Laboratory based on CSE 135
CSE 137 DATA STRUCTURES 
91                                                                                                                                    School of Applied Sciences and Technology
3 Hours/Week, 3 Credits
Internal Data Representation. Specification, representation and manipulation of basic data structures: arrays, records and pointers, 
linked lists, stacks, queues, recursion, trees, optimal search trees, heaps. Graphs and their application, List and string processing, 
Searching and Sorting algorithms. Hashing techniques, Storage Management.
CSE 138 DATA STRUCTURE LAB.
4 Hours/Week , 2.0 Credits
Laboratory works based CSE 137
CSE 141 DISCRETE MATHEMATICS 
2 Hours/Week, 2 credits
Numbers,  Functions  and  Counting  :  Integers.  Definition  and  proof  by  induction.  Functions  on  finite  sets.  Divisibility. 
Eucildean algorithm. Exclusion inclusion principle.  Euler's Function.  Binomial  coefficients.  Designs, t-designs. Permutation. 
Modular  arithmetic  and  Euler's  theorem.  Examples  and  use  of  recurrence  relations  and  generating  functions  in  counting 
problems.  Graphs, Trees, Digraphs, Networks and flows: graphs and their isomorphism. Valencey. Paths and cycles. Trees. 
Colouring the vertices of a graph. Counting the leaves on a rooted tree. Spanning trees and the MST Problems.  Bipartite  graphs 
and matching problems. Transversals for families of finite sets. Diagraphs, Networks and flows. The max -flow and min-cut 
theorem.  Finite Geometries : Cryptology and coding theory, Review of the theory of the finite fields. Finite fields and Latin 
Squares. Finite geometry and designs. Finite projective planes. Steinear triple systems. Basic ideas of public key cryptology and 
the theory of error correcting codes. Hamming code.  
CSE 201* INTRODUCTION TO ELECTRICAL MACHINARIES
2 Hours/Week, 2 Credits
Single phase transformer, Introduction to three phase transformer; DC machines: DC generator principle, types, characteristics 
and  performances.  AC machines:  Single  phase  induction motor,  three  phase  induction motor,  introduction  to  synchronous 
machines; Oscilloscope; Transducers: Strain, temperature, pressure, speed and torque measurements.
CSE 203* INTRODUCTION TO COMPUTER LANGUAGE
2 Hours/Week, 2 Credits
Software: Basic concept and its classification; Overview of programming languages;
C-Language: Preliminaries, Program constructs, variables and data types in C. Input and output. Character and formatted I/O; 
Arithmetic Expressions and Assignment statements; Loops and Nested loops; Decision making; Arrays, Functions; Arguments 
and local variables, Calling Functions and arrays.  Recursion and Recursive functions; Structures within structure.  Files; File 
functions for sequential and Random I/O. Pointers; Pointers and structures; Pointer and functions; Pointer and arrays; Operation 
and Pointer;  Pointer  and memory addresses;  Operations on Bits;  Bit  Operation;  Bit  field;  Advanced features;  Standard and 
library. 
CSE 204* INTRODUCTION TO COMPUTER LANGUAGE LAB
4 Hours/Week, 2 Credits
Laboratory works based on theory classes.
CSE 205* DATABASE MANAGEMENT AND PROGRAMMING
2 Hours/Week, 2 Credits
Introduction  to  Database:  Database  Management  System,  Relational  Database  management  System,  Entity-Relationship 
Model, Relational Model, SQL, Sorting, Indexing, Integrity Constraints, Transaction Concept, Database System Architecture. 
Database Management: Creating a Database, Opening a Database, Modifying a Database, Modifying a Database Structure, 
Indexing,  Sorting,  Searching a Database,  Designing a  Customer Screen,  Designing a  Report,  Designing a Menu.  Database 
Programming: Programming  concept,  A  Simple  Program,  Memory  variables,  Constants,  Operators,  Commands,  Arrays, 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering                                                                                                                      92
Macros,  Different  Type  of  Processing,  Procedures,  Functions.  Programming  for  Data  Entries,  Update,  Report,  Menu  and 
Searching.
CSE 206* DATABASE MANAGEMENT AND PROGRAMMING LAB
4 Hours/Week, 2 Credits
Laboratory works based on the theory classes.
CSE 221 DIGITAL LOGIC DESIGN
3 Hours/Week, 3 Credits
Boolean Algebra and Minimization: Introductory concept of number systems and codes. Boolean constants and variables, truth 
tables.  Basic  logic  functions.  Boolean  expressions.  Implementing  circuits  from  Boolean  expressions.  Boolean  theorems, 
DeMorgan's  theorem.  Sum-of-product  and  product-of-sum  forms.  Simplifying  logic  circuits,  algebraic  simplification,  the 
Karnaugh map method, Quine-McCluskey design method. Logic Gates and Combinational Circuits: Different types of logic 
gates.  Circuit  design  using  NAND or  NOR gates  only.  Alternate  logic-gate  representations.  Designing  combinatorial  logic 
circuits. Exclusive OR and NOR circuits. Logic circuits with multiple outputs. Designing without a truth table. Flip-flops: SR, 
JK,  D and T flipflops.  The D latch.  Master-slave FF.  Flipflop applications.  FF synchronization.  Data  storage and transfer. 
Frequency division and counting. One shot. Arithmetic circuits: Adder circuits. Carry propagation, carry look-ahead adder. IC 
parallel  adder.  The  2's  complement  addition  and  subtraction  system.  The  BCD  adder.  Binary  multiplier.  Counters  and 
Registers:  Asynchronous cuonter: Ripple counters, counters with mod numbers<2n, IC asynchronous counters, asynchronous 
down counter, propagation delay in ripple counters. Synchronous down and up/down counters. Decoding a counter. Decoding 
glitches.  Cascading BCD counters.  Shift-registers.  Counter  applications:  frequency counter,  digital  clock.  IC  registers.  MSI 
Logic  Circuits:  Decoders,  BCD-to-decimal  decoders,  BCD-to-7-segment  decoder/drivers.  Encoders.  Multiplexers  and 
multiplexer applications. Demultiplexers. Integrated-Circuit Logic Families: Digital IC terminologies, TTL logic family, TTL 
series characteristics, open-collector TTL, tristate TTL, ECL family, MOS digital ICs, MOSFET, CMOS characteristics, CMOS 
tristate logic, TTL-CMOS-TTL interfacing. Memory Devices: Memory terminology, general memory operation, semiconductor 
memory technologies, different types of ROMs, semiconductor RAMs, static and dynamic RAMs, Magnetic bubble memory, 
CCD memory, FPGA Concept.
CSE 222 DIGITAL LOGIC DESIGN LAB 
4 Hours/Week, 2 Credits
Laboratory works based on CSE 221 including FPGA
CSE 227 SEMICONDUCTOR DEVICES & CIRCUITS
4 Hours/Week, 4 Credits
Theory of Semiconductors: Electronic structure of the elements. Energy levels. Energy band theory of crystals. Energy band 
diagram  of  Insulator,  semiconductor  &  metal.  Free  electron  theory.  Bond  structure  of  Si  &  Ge.  Intrinsic  &  extrinsic 
semiconductor. Fermi level. Concept of hole. Carrier densities. generation & recombination of excess carriers. carrier lifetime. 
carrier  movement  by  diffusion  and  drift.Continuty  equation.  Semiconductor  Diodes: The  pn  junction.  Junction  biasing 
conditions. Effect of asymmetric doping. I-V characteristics. Dynamic and static resistance of diode. Half wave and Full wave 
rectification & filtering. Clipping and clamping circuits.  Voltage regulators.  voltage doubler and voltage multiplier. Junction 
capacitance and Varactor diode. Avaalanche and Zener breakdown. Zener and Tunnel diodes.  Bipolar Transistors: Junction 
transistors. npn & pnp transistors. Principle of transistor action. Potential distribution through a transistor, Transistor current 
components, emitter efficiency, transport factor, large signal current gain. Transistor as an amplifier. Transistor characteristics in 
CB, CE & CC configurations. Large signal, dc, and small signal CE values of current gain. Concept of load lines. Dynamic 
transfer curves of Ge & Si transistor. Transistor switching times. BJT Biasing and Basic amplifier circuit: The operating point. 
Capacitive coupling. The static and dynamic load lines. Bias stability. Thermal instability. Stability factor S. Analysis of different 
types of biasing circuits. Stabilization against variations in V
BE  
and beta for the self bias ckt. Bias-compensation and Thermal 
runaway. Classification of amplifier. BJT small signal amplifier circuit analysis in three configuration using different biasing 
circuit.  Push-pull  amplifier.Transistor  hybrid  model:  Determination  of  h-parameters  from the  characteristics.  Oscillators: 
Feedback and circuit requirements for oscillation. Nyquist's  criterion. Sinusoidal oscillators. Barkhausen criterion. Phase-shift 
93                                                                                                                                    School of Applied Sciences and Technology
oscillators, resonant circuit oscillators, Colpitt's and Hartley's  Oscillator, Wein bridge oscillator, crystal  oscillator. Frequency 
stability. Operational Amplifier: Basic differential amplifier. Differential amplifier circuits. Differential amplifier with current 
mirror and active load. Differential amplifiers in ICs.  Basics of operational amplifiers. The ideal OpAmp. Study of OpAmp 
parameters. OpAmp circuits. Active filters. Voltage regulation. Sample and hold circuit, phase-lock loop.
Field Effect Transistors: JFET: construction, operation, static characteristics, small signal model and parameters. MOSFET: 
different types,  operation, characteristics curves. DC biasing of depletion and enhancement type MOSFET. Different biasing 
conditions of JFET. Other Semiconductor devices: Industrial electronics devices: Thyristors, SCR, TRIAC, UJT, PUT, DIAC, 
Shockley diode.  Optoelectronics devices: LED, Liquid Crystal displays (LCD) Photodiodes, Phototransistors, Opto-isolators, 
Solar cells.
Reference: 
1. Electronic Devices & Circuit Theory--- Robert Boylestad, Louis Nashelsky.
2. Integrated Electronics – Jacob Millman, C. Halkias
CSE 227 SEMICONDUCTOR DEVICES & CIRCUITS LAB
4 Hours/Week, 2 Credits
Laboratory works based on CSE 228
CSE 233 OBJECT ORIENTED PROGRAMMING LANGUAGE
3 Hour/week, 3 Credits
Introduction to Java : History of Java,Java Class Libraries,Introduction to Java Programming,A simple Program. Developing 
Java Applicaion  :  Introduction,  Algorithms,  Pseudo  code,  Control  Structure,  The  If  /Else  Selection  Structure,  The  While 
Repetition  Structure,  Assignment  Operators,  Increment  and  Decrement  Operators,  Primitive  Data  Types,  Common  Escape 
Sequence, Logical Operator
Control Structure :  Introduction, The For Structure, The Switch Structure, The Do/While Structure, The Break and Continue 
Structure.  Methods :  Introduction, Program Module in Java, Math Class Methods, Method Definitions, Java API Packages, 
Automatic Variables, Recursion, Method Overloading, Method of the Applet Class. Arrays : Introduction, Arrays, Declaring and 
Allocating Arrays, Passing Arrays to Methods, Sorting Arrays, Searching Arrays, Multiple-Subscripted Arrays
Object-Based Programming : Introduction, Implementing a Time Abstract DataType with  a Class, Class Scope, Controlling 
Access  to  Members,  Utility  Methods,  Constructors,  Using  Overload  Constructor,  Using  Set  and  Get  Method,  Software 
Reusability, Friendly Members, Finalizers, Static Class Members, Data Abstraction and Information Hiding
Object-Oriented  Programming:  Introduction,  Superclasses  and  Subclasses,  Protected  Members,  Using  Constructor  and 
Finalizers in Subclasses, Composition vs. Inheritance, Introduction to polymorphism, Dynamic method building, Final Methods 
and Classes, Abstract Superclasses and Concrete Classes. String and Characters, Graphics, Exception Handling, Files and 
Stream, Java API, Utility Classes, 2D Graphics, GUI, Swing, Events.
CSE 234 OBJECT ORIENTED PROGRAMMING LANGUAGE LAB.
6 Hours/Week, 3 Credits
Laboratory works based on CSE 233.
CSE 237 ALGORITHM DESIGN AND ANALYSIS
3 Hours/Week , 3 Credits
Techniques  for  Analysis  for  Algorithms,  Standard  Efficient  Techniques,  Divide  and  Conquer,  Greedy  Method,  Dynamic 
Programming,  Back-Tracking, Branch and Bound,  Basic Search and Traversal Techniques ,  Topological  Sorting, Connected 
Components,  Spanning  Tree,  Shortest  Paths,  Flow  Algorithms,  Approximation  Algorithms,  Graph  Algorithms,  Geometric 
Algorithms, Parallel Algorithms, Algebraic Simplification and Transformations, Lower Bound Theory, NP Completeness, NP 
hard and NP complete problems. 
CSE 238 ALGORITHMS DESIGN AND ANALYSIS LAB
3 Hours/Week, 1.5 Credits
Department of Computer Science and Engineering                                                                                                                      94
Laboratory works based on CSE 237.
CSE 239 NUMERICAL ANALYSIS
2 Hours/Week, 2 credits
Numerical analysis:  Errors in numerical calculations. Error : Definitions, sources, examples. Propagation of Error. A general 
error formula.  Root finding :  The bisection method and the iteration method, the method of false position. Newton-raphson 
method.  Methods of  approximation theory : Polynomial  interpolation:  Lagrange form,  divided  formula  for  interpolation. 
Solution of systems of Linear equations: Gaussian elimination. The pivoting strategy, Iteration method solution of tridiagonal 
systems.  Numerical  solution  of  ordinary  differential  equations:  Euler's  method  (including  modified  form),  Rnge-Kutta 
method. Numerical Integration : Trapezoidal method. Simpson's method. Weddle's method; Eigen value problems for matrices, 
Use of computer to implement projects in numerical methods.
CSE 240 NUMERICAL ANALYSIS LAB
2 Hours/Week, 1 credits
Laboratory works based on CSE 239.
CSE 300 PROJECT WORK & SEMINAR
3 Hours/Week, 1.5 Credits
Based on Theory Courses and Seminar Presentation 
CSE 323 ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATION
2 Hours/Week, 2 Credits 
Principles of communication system: Basic constituents of communication system. Need for using high carrier frequency. 
Classification of RF spectrum.  Noise: Classification of noise. Addition of noise due to several sources. Signal to noise ratio. 
Noise figure. Modulation theory: Definition, types of modulation: AM, FM. Mathematical expressions of AM, FM and signals. 
Comparison of frequency modulation and Amplitude modulation. Pre-emphasis and de-emphasis. Wide band FM and narrow 
band FM. Stereophonic FM Multiplex system. SSB, DSBSC. Modulation/Demodulation methods. Radio wave propagation: 
Different types of ratio wave propagation Ionosphere. Vertical heights and critical frequencies of layers. Propagation of RW 
through  Ionosphere.  Reflection  of  RW.  Skip  distance  and  MUF.  Fading.  Static  and  noise.  Antenna  concepts.  Two  way 
communication. Principles of Satellite Communication, VSAT. Cellular Mobile Communication: Operation of Cellular mobile 
Systems, Planning, Analog and Digital Cellular System, AMPS, GSM, TDMA, CDMA, Intelligent cell concept and applications, 
Frequency Management, switching and Traffic, GPRS, EDGE, WAP.
CSE 325 MICROPROCESSORS & ASSEMBLY LANGUAGE
3 Hours/Week, 3 Credits
Microprocessors: Concept of microprocessor;  Evolution of  microprocessors;  Internal  architecture  of Intel  8085,  8086/8088 
microprocessors:Instruction set and format, Programming in machine and assembly languages, Interrupt structure, DMA, I/O 
operation,  Microprocessor  interface  ICs,  Peripheral  interfacing,  Microprocessor  based  system  design,  Coprocessor, 
Multiprocessor  system;  Intel  80286,  80386  microprocessors:  memory  management  scheme,  Protection  mechanism,  80386 
modes;  Advanced  microprocessors.  Interfacing  with  analog  world: A/D  conversion,  digital  ramp  ADC,  successive 
approximation ADC, flush ADC, tristate ADC, D/A converter, DAC specifications, DAC applications, Data acquisition, sample-
and-hold circuits, multiplexing.
CSE 326 MICROPROCESSORS & ASSEMBLY LANGUAGE LAB
3 Hours/Week , 1.5 Credits
Laboratory works based on CSE 325
95                                                                                                                                    School of Applied Sciences and Technology
CSE 327 DATA COMMUNICATION
3 Hours/Week, 3 Credits
Introduction: Data communication networks, standards, communication architecture.
Data Transmission: Spectrum and bandwidth, Time and Frequency Domain, Analog and digital data transmission, Transmission 
impairments, Channel capacity, Transmission media.
Data  Encoding: Digital  data  and  digital  signaling,  Analog-to-Digital  Conversion,  Digital-to-Analog,  Digital-to-Digital 
Conversion.
Multiplexing:  FDM, WDM, TDM, STDM, Digital Subscriber Line.
Data Communication Interface: Parallel and Serial Transmission, Asynchronous and synchronous transmission, RS232C (or 
EIA 232D) standard, Different types of Modems,
Switching: Space division and time division switching, Two-dimensional switching, Circuit switching, Packet switching and 
hybrid switching, Timing, Network Synchronization, Routing and Traffic Control.
Digital Integrated Services Networks: X.25 standard, Frame Relay, ISDN, ATM, SONET/SDH.
Books: 
1. Data and Computer Communications - W Stallings, Macmillan, 1994 (4th edition)
2. Data Communications and Networking – Behrouz A. Forouzan (2nd edition)
3. Computer n etworks - A. S. Tanenbaum, Addison-Wesley, 1996 (3rd edition) 
3. Data Communication and Computer Network - Stawling
CSE 328 DATA COMMUNICATION LAB
3 Hours/Week, 1.5 Credits
Lab Based on CSE 327
CSE 329 COMPUTER ARCHITECTURE
3 Hours/Week , 3 Credits 
Introduction: Fundamentals  of Computer Design, Performance and cost.  Instruction Set: Instruction set  design, examples, 
measurement of use.  Processor Implementation: Datapath,  steps of execution, microprogram, Interrupts.  Pipelining: Basic 
pipelining, Pipeline Hazards. Memory Hierarchy Design: Principle of locality, general principle, Caches, Main memory, Virtual 
memory. Input/output Devices: Performance measure, Types of I/O device, Buses and interface to CPU, Parallel Processing.
CSE 331 SOFTWARE ENGINEERING
3 Hours/Week, 3 Credits
Introduction:  Overview  of  Software  Industry,  Introduction  to  Software  Engineering,  Software  Development  Process  and 
Various Life Cycle Models.  Requirement Analysis: Communication Techniques, Analysis Principles, Software Prototyping, 
Requirement Specification.  Group Dynamics: Working in Teams, Characteristics of Successful Team, Understanding Group 
Dynamics, Team Roles and Temperament, Democratic Team and Chief Programmer Team Approach. Introduction to Extreme 
Programming,  Analysis  Modeling: Steps  of  system  analysis,  Feasibility  study,  Economic  and  technical  analysis,  System 
specification, the elements of analysis model, Data modeling, Functional modeling and information flow, Behavioral modeling, 
Mechanics of structured analysis,  Data Dictionary.  Software Design: Design principles, Design Concepts, effective modular 
design, design heuristics, Data Design, Architectural Design process, Transformation mapping, Transaction mapping, interface 
design, human-computer interface design, procedural design. Software Testing: Testing fundamentals, test case design, white-
box  testing,  black-box testing,  testing GUIs,  Unit  testing,  Integration  testing,  validation  testing,  system  testing,  debugging. 
Maintenance: Major maintenance activities, estimating maintenance cost and productivity.  Technical Metrics for Software: 
Software quality, Framework for technical metrics, metrics for analysis and design models, source code, testing and maintenance. 
Software Architecture: Pipe and Filter,  Object  Oriented,  Event  Based,  Layered  System,  Data-centered  repository,  Process 
Control Architectures,  Objet Oriented Software Engineering: O-O concepts, O-O analysis,  Domain analysis,  O-O analysis 
process, Object relational model. O-O design: system design process, object design process, O-O programming.  O-O Testing: 
Testing  strategies,  test  case  design.  Software  Project  Management: Cost  estimation,  risk  analysis,  project  scheduling. 
Introduction to CASE Tools: What is CASE, taxonomy of CASE tools, iCASE environment, CASE repository, Example CASE 
tools. Intellectual Properties: Trade Marks, Copy Rights, Trade Secrets, Patents, Introduction to UML. 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering                                                                                                                      96
CSE 332 SOFTWARE ENGINEERING LAB
3 Hours/Week, 1.5 Credits
Laboratory works based on theory classes.
CSE 333 DATABASE SYSTEM
3 Hours/Week , 3.0 Credits
Introduction: Purpose of Database Systems, Data Abstraction, Data Models, Instances and Schemes, Data Independence, Data 
Definition Language, Data Manipulation Language, Database Manager, Database administrator, Database Users, Overall System 
Structure,  Advantages  and  Disadvantage  of  a  Database  Systems.  Relationship  Entity-Model:  Entities  and  Entity  Sets, 
Relationships  and Relationship Sets,  Attributes,  Mapping Constraints,  Keys,  Entity-Relationship  Diagram, Reducing of  E-R 
Diagram to Tables, Generalization, Aggregation, Design of an E-R Database Scheme. Relational Model: Structure of Relational 
Database, The Relational Algebra, The Tuple Relational Calculus, The Domain Relational Calculus, Modifying the Database, 
Views. Relational Commercial Language: SQL, Query-by-Example, Quel. Relational Database Design: Pitfalls in Relational 
Database Design, Normalization using Functional Dependencies, Normalization using Multivalued Dependencies, Normalization 
using join Dependencies.  File And System Structure:  Overall System Structure, Physical Storage Media, File Organization, 
Organization  of  Records  into  Blocks,  Sequential  Files,  Mapping Relational  Data  to  Files,  Data  Dictionary Storage,  Buffer 
Management. Indexing And Hashing: Basic Concepts, Indexing, B+- Tree Index Files, B-Tree Index Files, Static and Dynamic 
Hash Function, Comparison of Indexing and Hashing, Index Definition in SQL, Multiple Key Access. Query Processing: Query 
Interpretation, Equivalence of Expressions, Estimation of Query-Processing Cost, Estimation of Costs of Access Using Indices, 
Join Strategies,  Join Strategies for parallel Processing, Structure of the query Optimizer.  Concurrency Control:  Schedules, 
Testing for Serializability,  Lock-Based Protocols,  Timestamp-Based Protocols,  Validation  Techniques,  Multiple  Granularity, 
Multiversion Schemes, Insert and Delete Operations.  Distributed Database:  Structure of Distributed Databases, Trade-off in 
Distributing  the  Database,  Design  of  Distributed  Database,  Transparancy  and  Autonomy,  Distributed  Query  Processing, 
Recovery in Distributed Systems, Commit Protocols, Concurrency Control, Deadlock Handling.
CSE 334 DATABASE SYSTEM LAB
6 Hours/Week, 3 Credits
Laboratory works based on CSE 333.
CSE 335 OPERATING SYSTEM and SYSTEM PROGRAMMING
3 Hours/Week, 3 Credits
Introduction: Operating Systems Concept, Computer System Structures, Operating System Structures.  Process Management: 
Processes, Process Coordination, Deadlocks. Storage Management: Memory Management, Virtual Memory, Secondary Storage 
Management  Files and Protection: File Systems, Protection.  Distributed Systems: Distributed System Structure, Distributed 
Coordination, Distributed File Systems.  Case Studies: Study of a representative Operating Systems,  System Programming: 
Introduction to System Programming and Linux / Unix, Shell Programming, C Language for System Programming, Make and 
Make files, Process and Signals,  Threads, Inter process Communications, X- Window Programming, Principle of single and 
multi user operating systems.
CSE 336 OPERATING SYSTEMS and SYSTEM PROGRAMMING LAB
3 Hours/Week, 1.5 Credits
Laboratory works based on CSE 335.
CSE 339 THEORY OF COMPUTATION
2 Hours/Week , 2.0 Credits
Finite  Automata: Deterministic  and  nondeterministic  finite  automata  and  their  equivalence.  Equivalence  with  regular 
expressions. Closure properties. The pumping lemma and applications.  Context-free Grammars: Definitions. Parse trees. The 
pumping lemma for CFLs and applications. Normal forms. General parsing. Sketch of equivalence with pushdown automata. 
97                                                                                                                                    School of Applied Sciences and Technology
Turing Machines: Designing simple TMs. Variations in  the basic  model(multi-tape,  multi-head,  nondeterminism).  Church-
Turing thesis and evidence to support it through the study of other models.  Undecidability: The undecidability of the halting 
problem. Reductions to other problems. Reduction in general.
References : 1. Introduction to Languages and the Theory of Computation, 2nd Edition, by J. C.   
                    Martin, McGraw Hill Publications, 1997.
CSE 351 MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEM
3 Hours/Week, 3 Credits
Introduction to MIS : Management Information System Concept, Definitions, Role of MIS, Approaches of MIS development. 
MIS  and  Computer  :  Computer  Hardware  for  Information  System,  Computer  Software  for  Information  System,  Data 
Communication  System,  Database  Management  Technology,  Client-Server  Technology.  Decision  Support  System  : 
Introduction, Evolution of DSS, Functions of a DSS, Development of DSS, Group Decisions of DSS, Relationship between MIS 
and DSS, Future Development of DSS,  Application of MIS :  Applications of Manufacturing Sector, Applications in Service 
Sector, Case Studies.
CSE 400 THESIS
4 Hours/Week, 2 Credits 
Project work based on all major courses.
CSE 402 THESIS
6 Hours/Week, 3 Credits 
Project work based on all major courses.
CSE 421 COMPUTER INTERFACING 
2 Hours/Week , 2 Credits
Bus System: ISA, EISA, PCI AGP, Memory Bus. Interface Components: DAC, ADC, Stepper Motor, Transducers, printers, 
motors and peripherals.  Data Communication concepts: Serial communication, parallel communication, RS2332, Centronics, 
SCSI, USB and GPIB standards.  Design of computer interface systems: Development of hardware, development of control 
software development of data analysis and display.
CSE 422 COMPUTER INTERFACING LAB 
2 Hours/Week, 1 Credits
Laboratory works based on CSE 421.
CSE 431 COMPUTER NETWORKING 
3 Hours/Week, 3 Credits
Introduction: Introduction to  Computer Networks,  Network Goals,  Applications  of Networks,  Network Structure,  Network 
Architectures, The OSI Reference Model, Data Transmission in the OSI Model, OSI Terminology,  Connection-Oriented and 
Connectionless Services, Service Primitives, Public Networks, The ARPANET, SNA. Local Area Network : LAN Technology - 
Architecture, Topology, Wireless LAN. LAN System - Ethernet and Fast-Ethernet, Token Ring and FDDI, ATM LANs. Bridges 
-   Bridges operation,  outing through the bridge, ATM LAN emulation.  Wide Area Network: Circuit switching and Packet 
Switching concept, Frame Relay - frame relay protocol architecture, frame relay call control, user data transfer, network function 
and congestion control. The Data Link Layer: Services Provided to the Network Layer, Framing, Error Control, Flow Control, 
Error  Detection  and  Correction,  Error  Correcting  Codes,  Error  Detecting  Codes,  Stop-and-Wait  Protocol,  Sliding  Window 
Protocol, Go Back n Protocol, Selective Repeat Protocol, Performance of Stop and Wait Protocol and Sliding Window Protocol,  
The Data Link Layer in Public Networks, The Data Link Layer in ARPANET.  Communication Architecture and Protocol: 
Protocols  and  Architecture  -  protocols  ,  network  reference  model,  TCP/IP  protocol  suite.  Internetworking  -  principles  of 
internetworking, connectionless internetworking, The Internet protocol, Routing Protocol, Ipv6 and ICMv6. Transport Protocol - 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering                                                                                                                      98
Transport  Services,  Protocol  mechanisms,  TCP,  UDP.  Network  Security  -  Security  requirements  and  attacks,  Privacy with 
conventional encryption,  Message Authentication and Hash functions, Public-key encryption and digital signatures, Ipv4 and 
Ipv6 security. Distributed Applications: Abstract Syntax Notation One (ASN.1), Network Management - SNMPv2, Electronic 
mail  -  SMTP and  MIME,  Uniform Resource  Locator  (URL)  and  Universal  Resource  Identifier  (URI),  Hypertext  Transfer 
Protocol (HTTP).
CSE 432 COMPUTER NETWORKING LAB 
4 Hours/Week, 2 Credits
Laboratory works based on CSE 431.
CSE 433 ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
3 Hours/Week, 3 Credits
What is Artificial Intelligence: The AI problems, The underlying assumption, What is an AI technique.  Problems, Problem 
spaces and Search: Defining the problem as a state space search, Production system, Problem characteristics. Heuristics Search 
Techniques: Generate  and Test,  Hill  climbing,  Best  First  Search,  Problem Reduction,  Constraint  Satisfaction,  Means-Ends 
Analysis.  Knowledge Representation Issues: Representation and Mappings, Approaches to knowledge Representation, Issues 
in  Knowledge  representation.  Using  Predicate  logic:  Representing  simple  facts  in  logic,  Representing  Instance  and  Isa 
relationships,  Computable  functions  and  Predicates,  Resolution.  Representing  Knowledge  using  Rules:  Procedural  versus 
Declarative Knowledge, Logic Programming, Forward versus Backward Reasoning, Matching.  Game playing: Overview, The 
Mimimax Search Procedure, Adding Alpha-Beta cutoffs, Additional refinements, iterative Deepening, Planning: Overview, An 
example  Domain:  The  Blocks  World,  Components  of  a  planning  system,  Goal  stack  planning,  Understanding:  What  is 
Understanding,  What  makes  Understanding  hard,  Understanding  as  constraint  satisfaction.  natural  Language  Processing: 
Introduction, Syntactic Processing, Semantic Analysis, Discourse and Pragmatic Processing. Expert systems: representing and 
using domain knowledge, Expert system shells explanation, Knowledge Acquisition. AI Programming Language: Prolog, LISP
CSE 434 ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE LAB 
3 Hours/Week, 1.5 Credits
Laboratory works based on CSE 433.
CSE 439 COMPILER CONSTRUCTION 
3 Hours/Week, 3 Credits
Introduction to compilers: Introductory concepts, types of compilers, applications, phases of a compiler. Lexical analysis: Role 
of the lexical analyzer, input buffering, token specification, recognition of tokens, symbol tables.  Parsing:  Parser and its role, 
context free grammars, top-down parsing. Syntax-directed translation: Syntax-directed definitions, construction of syntax trees, 
top-down translation.  Type checking:  Type systems, type expressions, static and dynamic checking of types, error recovery. 
Run-time  organization:  Run-time  storage  organization,  storage  strategies.  Intermediate  code  generation: Intermediate 
languages, declarations, assignment statements.  Code optimization:  Basic concepts of code optimization, principal sources of 
optimization.  Code  generation:  Features  of  some  common  compilers:  Characteristic  features  of  C,  Pascal  and  Fortran 
compilers.
CSE 440 COMPILER CONSTRUCTION LAB
3 Hours/Week, 1.5 Credits
Laboratory works based on theory classes.
CSE 451 COMPUTER GRAPHICS 
3 Hours/Week, 3 Credits
Computer  Graphics  Programming: OpenGL.  Camera  Analogy: Viewing,  Windowing,  Clipping.  Projective 
Transformation(Ray-tracing): Orthogonal Projection, Perspective Projection,  Vector: Normal Vector, View Vector,  Matrix: 
99                                                                                                                                    School of Applied Sciences and Technology
2D and  3D Rotation  and  Translation  Matrix,  Raster  Graphics: Line  Drawing,  Anti-aliasing,  Polygon  Filling  Algorithms, 
Hidden Surface  Removal: z-buffering,  Lighting  and Surface  Property:  Diffused  Light,  Ambient  Light,  Specular  Light, 
Lighting Models for reflection, refraction and transparency, Shading: Flat Shading, Lambert Shading, Phong Shading, Texture 
Mapping:  Texture  Fundamentals,  Texture  Blending,  Curves  and  Surfaces: Types  of  Curves,  Cubic-Spline,  Beta-Spline, 
NURBS, Animation: Real time animation, Hardware for real-time animation, Character Animation, Computer Games, Movies, 
Image Formats: PPM, BMP, Image Based Rendering, Morphing: View-morphing, Volume Metamorphosis.
References:
1. Computer Graphics: Principles and Practice, Folley, Van Damn, Feiner, Hughes,
2. Computer Graphics: A Programming Approach: Steven and Harrington.
3. OpenGL(r) 1.2 Programming Guide, Third Edition: The Official Guide to Learning OpenGL, Version 1.2: by 
Mason Woo, Jackie Neider, Tom David, Dave Shriner,  OpenGL Architecture Review Board, Tom Davis, Dave 
Shreiner.
4. Graphics Programming in C: Roger T. Stevens.
5. Texture and Modeling: by David S. Ebert.
CSE 452 COMPUTER GRAPHICS PROGRAMMING LAB
3 Hours/Week, 1.5 Credits
Laboratory works based on theory classes.
CSE 453 INTERNET PROGRAMMING AND MULTIMEDIA BASICS 
2 Hours/Week,  2 Credits
Internet  Programming -  An overview of distributed Java applications,  stream-based network applications,  remote objects, 
database connectivity, and agents. Case studies from enterprise applications and security domains. 
Multimedia systems - introduction; Coding and compression standards; Architecture issues in multimedia; Operating systems 
issues in multimedia - real-time OS issues, synchronization, interrupt handling; Database issues in multimedia - indexing and 
storing  multimedia  data,  disk  placement,  disk  scheduling,  searching  for  a  multimedia  document;  Networking  issues  in 
multimedia -  Quality-of-service  guarantees,  resource  reservation,  traffic  specification,  haping,  and  monitoring,  admission 
control;  Multicasting issues; Session directories; Protocols for controlling sessions;  Security issues in multimedia – digital 
water-marking, partial encryption schemes for video streams; Multimedia applications - audio and video conferencing, video on 
demand, voice over IP.
CSE 454 INTERNET PROGRAMMING AND MULTIMEDIA LAB
2 Hours/Week, 1 Credits
Laboratory works based on theory class.
OPTIONS : 
CSE 425 DIGITAL SIGNAL PROCESSING
3 Hours/Week, 3 Credits
Discrete  Signals  and  systems.  Z  transform.  Fourier  transform,  FFT,  DFT,  Digital  filter  design  technique,  interpolation, 
Decimation.
CSE 426 DIGITAL SIGNAL PROCESSING LAB
3 Hours/Week, 1.5 Credits
Laboratory works based on theory classes.
CSE 427 FIBER OPTICS
3 Hours/Week, 3 Credits
Department of Computer Science and Engineering                                                                                                                      100
Optical fiber: Nature of list, Optics low, Optical fiber mode, Single mode fiber, Graded index structure. Signal degradation in 
optical fibers:  Attenuation, Signal distortion, Pulse Broadening mode coupling.  Optical sources:  LED, Laser diodes, Light 
source linearity modal partition and reflection noise. Power launching and Coupling: Source to fiber power launching, lansing 
scheme, fiber to fiber joints, Splicing fiber connectors.  Photodetectors:  Basic principle, photodelectors noise, response time, 
Avalauch multiplication noise. Optical receiver operation: Receiver configuration, digital receiver performance preamplifiers. 
Digital  transmission  system:  Point  to  point  link,  line  coding,  Eye  pattern,  system  performance.  Advanced systems and 
techniques: WDM, Local area networks, Optical amplifier, Photonic switching.
CSE 428 FIBER OPTICS LAB
3 Hours/Week, 1.5 Credits
Laboratory works based on theory classes.
CSE 441 NEURAL NETWORK
3 Hours/Week, 3 Credits
Hopfield Model: Associative  Memory,  Stochastic  Networks,  Correlated Patterns.  Introduction: Neuroscience,  History and 
Issues.  Optimization Problems: Weighted Matching Problem, Traveling Salesman Problem. Neural Network: Feed-Forward 
Network, Multi-Layer Network. Unsupervised Learning: Hebbian Learning, Competitive learning.
CSE 442 NEURAL NETWORK LAB
3 Hours/Week, 1.5 Credits
Laboratory works based on Theory classes.
CSE 457 PARALLEL PROCESSING
3 Hours/Week, 3 Credits
Parallel Computing architectures: Overview of the major classes of architectures and their evolution. Parallel programming 
models and performance analysis: Modeling, performance analysis,  efficiency, and benchmarking.  Programming parallel 
computers: Overview of parallel programming, parallel languages, parallelizing compilers, message passing and data parallel 
Programming models.  Message passing programming and MPI: Uses; historical background and use on MIMD machines; 
current implementations; programming using the Message Passing Interface (MPI).  Data parallel programming and HPF : 
Data parallel programming paradigm; historical background and use on SIMD machines; array syntax; Fortran 90 and High 
Performance  Fortran (HPF).   Shared memory programming,  threads  and OpenMP :  Use of  shared memory  machines; 
threads; mutual exclusion; locks, semaphores and monitors; parallel Java; programming using OpenMP.  Case Study :  Monte 
Carlo Simulation of the Ising Model - Case study from computational physics; different approaches to parallelism; regular vs 
irregular  problems;  techniques  and  tricks  for  parallel  implementation  in  MPI,  HPF,  OpenMP  and  threads.   Distributed 
computing: Distributed  and  concurrent  computing  on  loosely  coupled  distributed  systems;  motivation  and  applications; 
transparency and metacomputing; networks and clusters of workstations; cluster management systems.  Distributed computing 
middleware: Middleware; RPC; DCE; CORBA; Java RMI. Middleware, DCE CORBA Java RMI. Grid computing:  The Grid; 
Grid computing (metacomputing over wide-area networks); grid computing  environments (Globus, Legion, DISCWorld, ...); 
Internet computing (SETI@Home, etc). Grid computing: Internet computing.
CSE 458 PARALLEL PROCESSING LAB 
3 Hours/Week, 1.5 Credits
Laboratory works based on theory classes.
CSE 461 DISTRIBUTED SYSTEM
3 Hours/Week, 3.0 Credits
Fundamental Distributed Algorithms: Clock synchronization, partial order of events, election algorithms, distributed shared 
memory, process synchronization. File and Directory Systems: Naming and name resolution; name, directory, and file servers; 
101                                                                                                                                    School of Applied Sciences and  
Technology
cashing.  Distributed  Databases: Locking  and  concurrency  control,  deadlock  handling,  stable  storage,  two-phase  commit. 
Security  and Protection: Encryption,  public  and private keys,  authentication,  privacy.  Distributed Services: File transfer, 
electronic mail, World-Wide Web. Examples of Distributed Systems: Some of: Mach, Amoeba, OSF DCE, CORBA, DCOM.
Reference: Distributed Systems -- Concepts and Design, 3rd ed., by G. Coulouris, J. Dollimore, T. 
                    Kindberg, Addison--Wesley,2001.
CSE 462 DISTRIBUTED SYSTEM LAB
3 Hours/Week, 1.5 Credits
Laboratory works based on theory classes.
CSE 463 ADVANCED DATABASE SYSTEM
3 Hours/Week , 3.0 Credits
Introduction : Object oriented Database, Data Model, Design, Languages;  Object Relational Database: Complex data types, 
Querying with complex data types, Design;  Distributed Database: Levels of distribution transparency, Translation of global 
queries to fragment queries,  Optimization of access strategies,  Management of distributed transactions, Concurrency control, 
reliability,  Administration;  Parallel  Database: Different  types  of  parallelism,  Design  of  parallel  database;  Multimedia 
Database Systems: Basic concepts, Design, Optimization of access strategies, Management of Multimedia Database Systems, 
Reliability; Database Wire-housing/Data mining: Basic concepts and algorithms.
Reference: Oracle Advanced PL/SQL Programming with CD-ROM, by Scott Urman.
CSE 464 ADVANCED DATABASE SYSTEM LAB
3 Hours/Week, 1.5 Credits
Laboratory works based on theory classes.
CSE 465 Digital Image Processing
3 Hours/Week , 3.0 Credits
Digital  Image  Fundamentals: Digital  Image  Fundamentals,  A  Simple  Image  Model,  Sampling  and  Quantization,  Basic 
Relationship between Pixels, Image Geometry. Image Transform: Introduction to the Fourier Transform, The Discrete Fourier 
Transform,  Properties  of  2D  Fourier  Transform,  The  Fast  Fourier  Transform,  Other  Separable  Image  Transform.  Image 
Enhancement:  Background, Enhancement by Point-Processing, Spatial Filtering, Enhancement in Frequency Domain, Color 
Image  Processing.  Image  Restoration:  Degradation  Model,  Diagonalization  of  Circulant  and  Block-Circulant  Matrices, 
Algebraic Approach to Restoration, Inverse Filtering, Geometric Transformation. Morphological Image and Signal Processing: 
The principle of Mathematical Morphology, Erosion and Dilation in the Euclidean Space, Closings and Openings, Grayscale 
Morphology,  Links between Links and Sets,  Grayscale  Morphological  Transformations,  Image Segmentation:  Detection of 
Discontinuities,  Edge Linking and Boundary Detection,  Thresholding, Region-Oriented Segmentation,  The use of Motion in 
Segmentation.
References : 
1. Digital Image Processing – Rafael C. Gonzalez and Richard E. Woods, Pearson Education Asia.
2. Non-Linear  Digital Filter : Principles and Applications – I. Pitas and A. N. Venetsanopoulos, Kluwer Academic 
Publications. 
CSE 466 DIGITAL IMAGE PROCESSING LAB
3 Hours/Week, 1.5 Credits
Laboratory works based on theory classes.
CSE 467 VLSI DESIGN
3 Hours/Week, 3 Credits
VLSI design methodology: top-down design approach, technology trends. NMOS, CMOS inverters,  pass transistor and pass 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering                                                                                                                      102
gates: dc and transient characteristics. Brief overview of fabrication process: NMOS, CMOS, Bi-CMOS process. NMOS and 
CMOS  layout,  stick  diagram  and  design  rules.  CMOS  circuit  characteristics  and  performance  estimation:  resistance  and 
capacitance, rise and fall time, power estimation. Buffer circuit design. Introduction to Bi-CMOS circuits.
Complex CMOS gates. CMOS building block: multiplexer, barrel shifter, adder, counter, multipliers. Data Path and memory 
structures. Design style: FPGA and PLDs.
Introduction to HDL: basic digital design using VHDL.
CSE 468 VLSI DESIGN LAB
3 Hours/Week, 1.5 Credits
Laboratory works based on theory classes.
CSE 471 MICROWAVE ENGINEERING
3 Hours/Week 3.0 Credits
Transmission Lines:  Voltage  and current  in  ideal  lines,  Reflection,  transmission,  standing wave,  impedance  transformation, 
Smith chart, impedance matching, quarter wave matching, single and double stub matching. Wave-guides: General formulation 
for  guided  waves,  parallel  plate  wave  guides,  losses  in  the  parallel  plate  Rectangular  wave  guides,  different  modes  of 
propagation,  losses  ion wave  guides,  Circular  wave guides,  Microstrips,  their  structures  and their  characteristic  impedance. 
Resonant  Cavities:  Simple  rectangular  resonant  cavities,  Energy  storage,  losses  and  Q  of  the  resonators,  other  modes  in 
rectangular resonators. Radiation: Radiation from small current element. Radiation from Hertzian dipole, radiation resistance, 
radiation pattern, Properties of half wave dipole, Description of other types of antennas, mono-pole, horn, rhombic and parabolic 
reflector. Array antennas and their radiation patterns, Yagi-Uda antenna. Microwave Devices: Directional Coupler, attenuator, 
phase shifter, circulator etc. Microwave amplifiers and oscillators.   
CSE 472 MICROWAVE ENGINEERING LAB
3 Hours/Week 1.5 Credits
Laboratory works based on theory classes.
CSE 473 CELLULAR MOBILE SYSTEM & NETWORK PLANNING 
3 Hours/Week 3 Credits
Introduction to wireless communications and mobile applications. Cellular networks. Mobility management. GSM, GPRS, 3G 
networks.  WAP. Cellular  network planning. Wireless LANs and Mobile IP. Ad hoc wireless  networks.  Wireless broadband 
networks. Satellite networks.
CSE 474 CELLULAR MOBILE SYSTEM & NETWORK PLANNING LAB
3 Hours/Week 1.5 Credits
Laboratory works based on theory classes.
CSE 475 IP TELEPHONY
2 Hours/Week 2 Credits
Introduction – The Business of Telecommunications and where IP Telephony Fits, Definitions, Concepts, and Terminology, 
The current state of Telecommunications Technology, Services, and Applications (Technology Convergence), Telephony Issues 
that all Technologies (Analog, xDSL, VoIP) must Consider for Service Provision, Transmission, Signaling, Call control, Media 
Processing, Switching, Quality of Service, Applications and Economics of Telephony based services, Rating and Billing of Calls, 
Exercise – Simplified Telephony Business Decision,  Take home review exam, xDSL – Broadband Voice and Data Service 
Provision,  Definitions,  Concepts,  and Terminology,  ADSL,  SDSL,  HDSL,  VDSL, IDSL-ISDN, S-HDSL (HDSL-2),ADSL-
2,Basic Configuration, How it Works, xDSL Service Requirements (Voice, Fax, Video, Data),Economics of xDSL, Relationship 
between xDSL and IP Telephony, Exercise – Making a business case for xDSL to a customer, Take home review questions, IP 
Telephony – Introduction,  Definitions, Concepts, and Terminology, How does it Work? How Well Does it Work? What is 
Internet Telephony Good For? Open Versus Proprietary Systems, Typical VoIP Architecture, Telephone (PSTN) Interface(s), 
103                                                                                                                                    School of Applied Sciences and  
Technology
Exercise – Make a simple business case comparing Voice services using POTS, xDSL, and VoIP technologies, Take home exam 
review questions, IP Telephony Transmission, Signaling, Call Control, and Media Processing Issues, Voice Coders Issues, Echo 
Cancellation Issue, DTMF Detection and Notch-Out Issues, Routing and Switching Issues,  Quality of Service Issues (QoS), 
Bandwidth Management, SS7 and IP, Examples of IP Telephony in a Business Environment, Economics of IP Telephony, Exam 
Review Questions, Summary and Review of Material Covered, The Business of Telecommunications, xDSL Technology and 
Services, IP Telephony,
CSE 476 IP TELEPHONY LAB
2 Hours/Week 1 Credits
Laboratory works based on theory classes.
CSE 477 OPTICAL COMMUNICATION 
3 Hours/Week 3 Credits
Introduction  to  Optical  Communication.  Elementary  theory  of  propagation  through  optical  fibers.  Reflection,  Refraction, 
Dispersion and attenuation of signals propagation through Fiber Cables. Propagation characteristics of different kinds of fibers. 
Optical Transmitter: Laser in the field of optical communication. Optical detector, receivers and amplifiers. Unguided and guided 
optical  communication  system.  Economy  of  optical  fiber  system  in  Telecommunication,  Local  data  distribution,  data 
transmission and telemetry. Optical fiber digital commyunication. 
CSE 478 OPTICAL COMMUNICATION  LAB
3 Hours/Week 1.5 Credits
Laboratory works based on theory classes.
*(A-CEP, B-CEE, C-IPE, D-CHE, E-MAT, F-PHY, G-ANP, H-ECO, I-PAD, J-PSS, K-SCW, L-SOC, M-BAN, N-FOR, 
O-ENG, P-FTC, Z-PGE, R-ARC, S-GEN, T-BTC, U-BNG, V-PAD)
