 Experiment name:  Introduction to Laboratory  
Equipment   
Experiment No: 01 
Shahjalal University of Science and Technology 
(SUST) 
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering 
(EEE) 
Course Title: Basic Electrical and Electronic Circuits Lab 
Course Code: EEE -106 
Course Teacher: Tuhin Dev 
Lecturer 
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering 
(EEE) 
Shahjalal University of Science and Technology (SUST) 
Experiment No: 01 
Experiment Name: Introduction to Laboratory Equipment 
2013 
Prepared by Tuhin Dev, Lecurer,  
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering  
Shahjalal University of Science and Technology (SUST) Page 2 
Objective: To get acquainted with the various equipment and components to be used in circuit 
laboratory.  
Equipment: 
1. Trainer Board  
2. Voltmeter  
3. Ammeter  
4. AVO meter or Multimeter  
5. DC source  
6. Resistors  
Theory:  
Ohm's Law : Ohm's Law deals with the relationship between voltage and current in an ideal 
conductor. This relationship states that:  
At fixed temperature in an electrical circuit, the current passing through a conductor between two 
points is proportional to the potential difference (i.e. voltage drop or voltage) across the two 
points, and inversely proportional to the resistance between them. In mathematical terms, this is 
written as:  
V = I R 
where I is the current in amperes, V is the potential difference in volts, and R is a constant, 
measured in ohms, called the resistance. The potential difference is also known as the voltage 
drop, and is sometimes denoted by E or U instead of V.  
Current: The amount of electric current (measured in amperes) through some surface, e.g., a 
section through a copper conductor, is defined as the amount of electric charge (measured in 
coulombs) flowing through that surface over time. If Q is the amount of charge that passed 
through the surface in the time T, then the average current I is: 
I =Q / T 
 Voltage : Voltage (sometimes also called electric or electrical tension) is the difference of 
electrical potential between two points of an electrical or electronic circuit, expressed in volts. It 
Experiment No: 01 
Experiment Name: Introduction to Laboratory Equipment 
2013 
Prepared by Tuhin Dev, Lecurer,  
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering  
Shahjalal University of Science and Technology (SUST) Page 3 
measures the potential energy of an electric field to cause an electric current in an electrical 
conductor. Depending on the difference of electrical potential it is called extra low voltage, low 
voltage, high voltage or extra high voltage.  
Between two points in an electric field, such as exists in an electrical circuit, the difference in 
their electrical potentials is known as the electrical potential difference. This difference is 
proportional to the electrostatic force that tends to push electrons or other charge-carriers from 
one point to the other. Electrical potential difference can be thought of as the ability to move 
electrical charge through a resistance. At a time in physics when the word force was used 
loosely, the potential difference was named the electromotive force or EMF—a term which is 
still used in certain contexts. 
Voltmeter: Voltmeter is a device that is used to measure the voltage difference between two 
points. The potential difference can be measured by simply connecting the leads of the across the 
two points. 
Ammeter: Ammeter is a device that is used to measure the current level of the circuit. Since 
ammeters measures the flow of charge, the meter must placed in the network such that the charge 
will flow through the meter. Mistakenly placing the ammeter in parallel with a circuit will blow 
the fuse, possibly damaging the meter and causing injury. 
Wattmeter: The wattmeter measures the power delivered by a source and to a dissipative 
element.  
Circuit Breaker and Fuses: The incoming power to any installation or house or machinery 
must be limited to ensure the current through the line is not above the rated value. Otherwise the 
instrument may be damaged or serious hazards like fire or smoke nay result in. To limit the 
current level circuit breakers and fuses are used. Fuses have an internal metallic conductor 
through which the current will pass; a fuse will melt if the current through the system exceeds 
the rated value printed on the casing. Of course, if the fuse melts through, the current path is 
broken and the load in its path is broken and the load in its path is protected.  
Experiment No: 01 
Experiment Name: Introduction to Laboratory Equipment 
2013 
Prepared by Tuhin Dev, Lecurer,  
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering  
Shahjalal University of Science and Technology (SUST) Page 4 
Fuses have now been replaced by circuit breakers. In circuit breaker when the current exceeds 
rated conditions an electromagnet in the device will have sufficient strength to draw the 
connecting metallic link in the breaker out of the circuit and open the current path. When the 
conditions have been corrected the breaker can reset and used again. 
Resistor Color Coding:  
Some small resistors have four or five color bands printed on one end of outer casing to indicate 
the value of it. The color bands are always read from the end that has the band closet to it.  
The first and second bands represent the first and second digits respectively. The third band 
determines the power of ten multiplier for the first two digits or a multiplying factor if gold or 
silver. The fourth band is the manufacturer’s tolerance, which is an indication of the precision be 
which the resistor was made. If the fourth band is omitted the tolerance is assumed to be ±20% . 
The fifth band is a reliability factor, which gives the percentage of failure per 1000 hours of use. 
For instance, a1% failure rate would reveal that one out of every 100 (or 10 out of every 1000) 
would fail to fall within the tolerance range after 1000 hours of use. 
Experiment No: 01 
Experiment Name: Introduction to Laboratory Equipment 
2013 
Prepared by Tuhin Dev, Lecurer,  
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering  
Shahjalal University of Science and Technology (SUST) Page 5 
Multimeter: A multimeter or a multitester is an electronic measuring instrument that combines 
several functions in one unit. The most basic instruments include an ammeter, voltmeter, and 
ohmmeter. Analog multimeters are sometimes referred to as "volt-ohm-meters", abbreviated 
VOM. Digital multimeters are usually referred to as "digital-multi-meters", abbreviated DMM.  
Contemporary equipment can measure many quantities besides voltage and resistance. Some 
common additional measured quantities and the units in which they are measured:  
 Capacitance in farads.  
 Frequency in hertz.  
 Duty cycle as a percentage.  
 Temperature in degrees Celsius or Fahrenheit.  
 Conductance in siemens.  
 Inductance in henrys.  
Breadboard :A breadboard is a reusable solderless device used to build a (generally temporary) 
prototype of an electronic circuit and for experimenting with circuit designs. This is in contrast to 
stripboard (veroboard) and similar prototyping printed circuit boards, which are used to build 
more permanent prototypes or one-offs, and cannot easily be reused. A typical breadboard will 
have strips of interconnected electrical terminals, known as bus strips, down one or both sides—
either as part of the main unit or as separate blocks clipped on—to carry the power rails.  
A modern solderless breadboard consists of a perforated block of plastic with numerous tin 
plated phosphor bronze spring clips under the perforations. Integrated circuits (ICs) in dual inline 
packages (DIPs) can be inserted to straddle the centerline of the block. Interconnecting wires and 
the leads of discrete components (such as capacitors, resistors, inductors, etc.) can be inserted 
into the remaining free holes to complete the circuit topology. 
Experiment No: 01 
Experiment Name: Introduction to Laboratory Equipment 
2013 
Prepared by Tuhin Dev, Lecurer,  
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering  
Shahjalal University of Science and Technology (SUST) Page 6 
Electrical power supplies  
i. Power supply (sometimes known as a power supply unit or PSU) is a device or system that 
supplies electrical or other types of energy  
ii. Conversion of one form of electrical power to another desired form and voltage. This typically 
involves converting 120 or 240 volt AC supplied by a utility company (see electricity generation) 
to a well-regulated lower voltage DC for electronic devices. For examples, see switched-mode 
power supply, linear regulator, rectifier and inverter (electrical).  
iii. Batteries  
Procedure:  
1. Set the voltage on the breadboard to an arbitrary voltage between 10V and 14V. Measure this 
voltage with at least 4 different types of multimeters and different types of probes. For one 
measurement, use the DVM embedded in the trainer board. 
Experiment No: 01 
Experiment Name: Introduction to Laboratory Equipment 
2013 
Prepared by Tuhin Dev, Lecurer,  
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering  
Shahjalal University of Science and Technology (SUST) Page 7 
2. Calculate the values of the supplied resistors using the color code chart theoretically. Then 
measure the values using a multimeter and complete the following table: 
3. Construct the following Circuit. Theoretically calculate RT (Total resistance), I (Total 
Current), Vab, Vcd Va and Vb. Again calculate the same quantities using the multimeter and 
complete table 3. 
Experiment No: 01 
Experiment Name: Introduction to Laboratory Equipment 
2013 
Prepared by Tuhin Dev, Lecurer,  
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering  
Shahjalal University of Science and Technology (SUST) Page 8 
Report:  
1. In step 1, what are the reasons of getting different results using different sets of  multimeters 
and probes for the same supply voltage?  
2. A series circuit comprises of a 10V DC source and a 100Ώ resistance. Calculate the  current 
flowing through the circuit using ohm’s law. Now assume, to measure the  current flow, an 
ammeter with an internal resistance 100 Ώ is placed in series with the  circuit. What will be the 
ammeter reading? Why this error occurred?  
3. Using table 3, calculate the approximate internal resistance of the multimeter.  
Questions for the Discussion:  
1. Why an ammeter can be damaged if it is connected in parallel to the Load resistor?  
2. With an example explain voltmeter loading effect.  
3. In step 2, why the theoretical calculation and practical reading varies? 
