 Shahjalal University of Science and 
Technology (SUST) 
 
  
 
Role of AVR and AGC 
 
 
 
 
Prepared by 
Tuhin Dev 
Lecturer 
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering 
(EEE) 
Shahjalal University of Science and Technology (SUST) 
Role of AVR and AGC 
 
Prepared by Tuhin Dev, Lecturer, Department of EEE 
Shahjalal University of Science and Technology (SUST) Page 2 
Role of AVR 
AVR (Automatic voltage regulator) has following roles. 
1- To regulate generator terminal voltage. 
Mainly generator under no-load condition, AVR regulates the generator voltage to voltage 
setter (90R). 
 
 
 
 AVR detects terminal voltage and compare with voltage setter (90R). 
 AVR regulates field current via the Exciter. 
 Generator terminal voltage is regulated by field current. 
Vt < 90R _ Field current will be increase 
Vt > 90R _ Field current will be decrease 
 
2-To adjust MVars (Reactive power). 
When the generator connected to power grid, AVR adjust reactive power by regulate 
generator voltage. 
 
 
Role of AVR and AGC 
 
Prepared by Tuhin Dev, Lecturer, Department of EEE 
Shahjalal University of Science and Technology (SUST) Page 3 
 MVar (Reactive power: Q) is regulated by generator terminal voltage. Therefore 
AVR can regulate MVars. 
 Vt is increased _ MVars will be increase 
 Vt is decreased _ MVars will be decrease 
Hence; 
 To increase MVars _ 90R raise 
 To decrease MVars _ 90R lower 
 
3-To improve the power system stability. 
There are two stability 
-Transient stability …… Improved by AVR 
-Dynamic stability ……. Improved by PSS (power system stabilizer) 
 
 
 
 
 
Role of AVR and AGC 
 
Prepared by Tuhin Dev, Lecturer, Department of EEE 
Shahjalal University of Science and Technology (SUST) Page 4 
* Improve the Transient stability 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Transient stability is improved by high initial response characteristic. In the fault 
condition, Field voltage is increased to keep the generator voltage constantly. If the 
excitation response is slow, it will not able to keep voltage and the generator cannot keep 
synchronizing. 
 
 
 * Improve the Dynamic state stability 
Dynamic stability is improved by Power System Stabilizer (PSS). PSS is provided in order 
to improve the power system dynamic stability. PSS will control the excitation to reduce 
the power swing rapidly. 
 
 
 
Role of AVR and AGC 
 
Prepared by Tuhin Dev, Lecturer, Department of EEE 
Shahjalal University of Science and Technology (SUST) Page 5 
4-To suppress the over-voltage on load rejection. 
When the load rejection, field current and field voltage should be reduced rapidly to keep 
terminal voltage constantly and prevent overvoltage. 
 
 
AUTOMATIC GENERATION CONTROL (AGC): 
1.0 INTRODUCTION 
Maintaining power system frequency at constant value is very important for the health of 
the power generating equipment and the utilization equipment at the customer end. The 
job of automatic frequency regulation is achieved by governing systems of individual 
turbine-generators and Automatic Generation Control (AGC) or Load frequency control 
( LFC) system of the power system. 
2.0 FREQUENCY VARIATION IN A SINGLE MACHINE 
To understand the variation of frequency in a power system, we can consider a single 
machine connected to an isolated load, as shown in the figure below. 
 
Role of AVR and AGC 
 
Prepared by Tuhin Dev, Lecturer, Department of EEE 
Shahjalal University of Science and Technology (SUST) Page 6 
 
Normally, the turbine mechanical power (Pm) and the electrical load power (Pl) are 
equal. Whenever there is a change in load, with mechanical power remaining the same 
the speed (ω) of the turbine generator changes as decided by the rotating inertia (M) of 
the rotor system, as given by the following differential equation.. 
Pm-Pl = M [dω/dt ] 
The governing system senses this change in speed and adjusts steam control valve so 
that mechanical power (Pm) matches with the changed load (Pl). Speed variation stops 
but at a different steady value. The change in frequency (Δω) at steady state can be 
described using the following equation in terms of change in load (Δ Pl) and a factor R 
called ‘speed regulation or ‘droop’. 
Δω = - [Δ Pl ]( R)  
A 20 % change in load (Δ Pl = 0.2 per unit) causes 1 % change in frequency (Δω = 0.01 
p.u) with a per unit (p.u) droop value of 0.05. Similarly full load throw off (Δ Pl = - 1.0) causes 
5 % change in speed. (Δω = + 0.05). This is described by the well known droop 
characteristic. 
Role of AVR and AGC 
 
Prepared by Tuhin Dev, Lecturer, Department of EEE 
Shahjalal University of Science and Technology (SUST) Page 7 
 
 
3.0 NEED FOR SUPPLEMENTARY CONTROL 
Now when there is a load change, speed settles down after a transient period at a value 
different from the original steady speed. This new speed value is dictated by the droop 
value. For instance a 100 % load rejection will cause the machine speed to settle down at 
105 % speed, with a droop value of 5 %, as shown in the figure below. During the 
transient, speed may touch a higher value as shown in the figure (by TSR: transient speed 
rise). The speed however has to be brought back to the original value for which speed/ 
load reference (Pref) has to be adjusted either by the operator or by a supplementary 
control system. 
Role of AVR and AGC 
 
Prepared by Tuhin Dev, Lecturer, Department of EEE 
Shahjalal University of Science and Technology (SUST) Page 8 
 
In the speed control system block diagram shown in Fig. 4, when elec. load changes, 
reference set point is to be adjusted to restore speed to the pre-disturbed value. This is 
equivalent to shifting the speed droop characteristic to match the new operating load as 
shown in Fig. 5. 
 
Role of AVR and AGC 
 
Prepared by Tuhin Dev, Lecturer, Department of EEE 
Shahjalal University of Science and Technology (SUST) Page 9 
 
4.0 AUTOMATIC GENERATION CONTROL (AGC) 
Automatic Generation Control (AGC) usually implemented in Energy Management 
system (EMS) of Energy Control centers (ECC) consists of 
 Load frequency control 
 Economic Dispatch 
 Interchange scheduling 
In this section Load frequency control is described. 
LOAD FREQUENCY CONTROL 
The speed/ frequency variation concept can be extended from a single turbine- generator 
system to a power system comprising several turbine- generators as shown in Fig.6. Now 
the mismatch between the total power generated and the total electrical load causes the 
frequency change as dictated by the combined system inertia. The governors of all the machines 
sense the frequency and the mechanical power outputs will be changed 
Role of AVR and AGC 
 
Prepared by Tuhin Dev, Lecturer, Department of EEE 
Shahjalal University of Science and Technology (SUST) Page 10 
automatically to match the combined generation with the new combined load. This action 
is called primary regulation. 
But frequency remains at a new value and set points must be adjusted, just as in single 
machine case for frequency restoration. This job is done by the Automatic Load 
Frequency controller (ALFC) as shown in Fig. 7. This process of set point adjustment is 
called secondary regulation. 
When load change occurs frequency varies and the regulation initially for the first few 
seconds is due to the action of the governors of all generating units and subsequently the 
Load frequency control system prevails. 
 
 
