 1 
SHAHJALA UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL & ELECTRONIC ENGINEERING 
 
COURSE NO: EEE124 
 
Experiment Number 1 
 
Experiment: Uses of Switches, Lamp Loads, Meters and Oscilloscope 
 
CAUTION:  
 
1. Do not connect the circuit to and turn on the supply until the circuit has been checked by 
your teacher or laboratory instructor. 
2. Electrical Circuits are potentially dangerous and may cause fatal injury resulting in death 
3. Take care of the range of reading of the apparatus before connecting it to the circuit. 
4. Do not come to physical contact with any bare circuit element in energized condition. 
5. Wear shoes without any nails. 
 
APPARATUS: 
 
1) Lamp boards(220V available wattage) 
2) SPST, SPDT, DPST, DPDT, TPST switches. 
3) Ammeter, Voltmeter, multimeter and oscilloscope 
 
OBJECTIVE:  
 
First part of this experiment is to acquaint the students with some simple circuits and to make them 
familiar with diagram reading, drawing and wiring with the help of different types of switches ( 
SPST- Single Pole Single Throw, SPDT- Single Pole Double Throw, DPST- Double Pole Single 
Throw , DPDT- Double Pole Double Throw ) and lamp loads that will be frequently encountered in 
different experiments. 
 
Second part of this experiment is to get familiar with ammeter, voltmeter, multimeter and 
oscilloscope to be used for measurement purposes in electrical circuits. 
 
PRELAB ASSIGNMENT:  
 
Draw the circuit diagram according to the instructions given below: 
 
1. Connect an electric lamp so that it may be operated from a 220 V ac supply using an SPST 
switch. 
2. Connect a lamp so that it may be operated by either of two SPST switches. 
3. Connect two lamps so that either may be operated from a common source by its own SPST 
switch. 
4. Connect two lamps so that both may be operated simultaneously from a common source by one 
SPST switch. Is it possible to do it in any other way? If possible, show both the diagrams and 
indicate the preferable one. 
5. Connect a lamp so that it may be operated independently by either of two SPDT switches from a 
220v source. 
6. Connect a lamp using two SPDT and one DPDT switches to the power supply in such way so 
that the lamp may be turned ON/OFF by any of the three switches. 
 2 
 
LAB WORK: 
 
1. Implement the circuits of your pre-lab assignment in the laboratory and check their 
functionality by connecting your circuit to the 230VAC 50 Hz supply. 
2. Connect two lamp boards in parallel and connect the combination to the 230 VAC 50 Hz 
supply. Make appropriate ammeter and voltmeter connections to read the voltage and 
current of the lamp boards individually. Change load by switching the lamps and take 
readings of the voltmeter and ammeters. Check the voltmeter reading with multimeter in 
each step. 
3. Connect two lamp boards in series and connect the combination to the 230 VAC 50 Hz 
supply. Make appropriate ammeter and voltmeter connections to read the voltage and 
current of each lamp board individually. Change load by switching the lamps and take 
readings of the voltmeter and ammeters. Check the voltmeter reading with multimeter in 
each step. 
4. Make an RC series circuit on a bread board and supply the circuit from a function generator. 
Using an oscilloscope observe (draw) and measure the voltage waveforms of the input 
voltage, voltage across the resistor and voltage across the capacitor with sinusoidal input and 
square wave input. 
5. Take ten carbon resistances of different values and measure their resistances with the 
multimeter. 
 
Report: 
 
Report results of your experiment on lab work part with drawing of all circuits, readings in 
tables, drawing of waveforms and your observation if any. 
 
Also write about what did you learn form this laboratory experiment. 
 
              
