 Shahjalal University of Science and 
Technology (SUST) 
 
   
Wye-Delta 
Connection in Power 
System 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prepared by 
Tuhin Dev 
Lecturer 
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering 
(EEE) 
Shahjalal University of Science and Technology (SUST) 
Wye-Delta Connection in Power System 
 
Prepared by Tuhin Dev 
Lecturer, Shahjalal University of Science and Technology (SUST)  Page 2 
 
Introduction 
In order, to understand the capabilities of a power system, we need to understand the different 
types of power systems and the different topologies that are available. A power system can be 
manufactured in two types:  
 WYE Power System  
 DELTA Power System 
WYE Power System 
The WYE power system generally offers neutral grounding giving the user a dual voltage system 
which is ground fault protected and the neutral reference many drive systems required for 
operation. The phase voltages are balanced to ground level unless the neutral is not hooked up 
and/or disconnected. If the neutral is not connected the system can no longer be used as a dual 
voltage power system. This could result in phase voltages becoming unstable. Transient voltages 
can cause severe damage to the insulation systems of all the equipment connected to it. WYE 
power systems cannot and do not filter out the harmonic noise caused by the controls and drives 
they are powering. 
DELTA Power System 
The DELTA power system is generally not grounded with an intentional ground connection at 
the power transformer level so the ground current level is very low with the first ground fault. It 
can operate smoothly with one phase solidly grounded. It is a natural harmonic filter and can 
feed surge current when necessary with less line voltage fluctuations. The DELTA power system 
design has been the workhorse of the industry for years, but it also has its draw backs: Phase 
voltages can become unbalanced to ground for many reasons, there is no neutral reference 
required by some drive manufacturers, and the second ground causes a phase-to-phase fault 
through ground. Transient voltage events cause high voltage stress on the insulation systems of 
all of the equipment. 
Different Topologies 
There are approximately eleven 3-Phase transformer power system connections but the four main 
types are DELTA-WYE, DELTA-DELTA, WYE-DELTA, and WYE-WYE. Each connection 
has unique advantages except for the WYE-WYE.  
DELTA-WYE: (Isolation Transformer) the primary winding acts as a harmonic filter by 
circulating currents through the phases. The secondary winding with a properly grounded 
neutral, operates single phase and three phase loads, provides dual voltages, is ground fault 
protected and the phase voltages are solidly ground referenced.  
Wye-Delta Connection in Power System 
 
Prepared by Tuhin Dev 
Lecturer, Shahjalal University of Science and Technology (SUST)  Page 3 
 
The DELTA-WYE is very popular in office buildings but has serious limitations in most 
industrial facilities as the secondary is very susceptible to harmonics. The primary-secondary 
phase shift is 210 degrees. 
DELTA-DELTA: (Isolation Transformer) the primary as well as the secondary winding can 
dissipate harmonic noise, can run "open delta" with only two transformers either by design or in 
an emergency. The primary and secondary coils of the bad phase can simply be disconnected and 
run in most (58 percent) of the original 3-Phase transformer bank capacity. This has been the 
workhorse of the industry as production activities can continue even with one phase solidly 
grounded and required maintenance can locate and repair during non-production times. 
WYE-DELTA: (Isolation Transformer) the primary winding is solidly ground referenced for 
phase voltage stability and the secondary winding dissipates harmonics. This design can operate 
with one phase solidly grounded. The WYE-DELTA transformer can operate "open-WYE/open 
DELTA" with only two transformers either by design or in an emergency. The primary and 
secondary coils of the bad phase can simply be disconnected and run in most (58 percent) of the 
original 3-Phase transformer bank capacity. The Primary-Secondary phase shift is 210 degrees. 
WYE-WYE: (No Isolation, least secure design) the primary and secondary coils are normally 
both grounded and some are supplied with an integral ground common to the primary and 
secondary. Environmental noise and background noise will enter the users facility unimpeded to 
every machine, drive and control as it is directly coupled from input to output.  
An isolation transformer filters low frequency noise by the inductive coupling between primary 
and secondary and an electrostatic shield can be inserted between the primary winding and the 
secondary winding to filter high frequency noise that is coupled by capacitive interaction.  
The WYE-WYE transformer connection has no filtering and all the noise on your power system 
is shared. The WYE secondary is very susceptible to harmonics. WYE-WYE systems generate 
considerable interference with communications systems and some jurisdictions prohibit their use. 
With the neutral not used or not connected to ground in a WYE-WYE system, the phase voltages 
become unstable and the entire system is susceptible to damage from transient voltage events and 
the harmonics now travel in the phase conductors. It is best to never try and parallel a WYE 
transformer with a DELTA transformer because they have a 30-degree phase differential.  
 
 
 
 
 
Wye-Delta Connection in Power System 
 
Prepared by Tuhin Dev 
Lecturer, Shahjalal University of Science and Technology (SUST)  Page 4 
 
Performance 
The transformer connection that will perform best in your facility depends on your application. 
DELTA-WYE is best suited for officies and storage facilities with the neutral solidly grounded. 
The best transformer connection for heavy 3-Phase industrial applications is the DELTA-
DELTA 3-wire ungrounded. This will give the user maximum uptime, the lowest total harmonic 
distortion (THD) and the most stable line voltages. The addition of Phaseback removes all 
problems on the DELTA secondary.  
Potential Solution - Applied Energy EMTVSS 
Applied Energy has introduced a cost effective solution to such power related issues. Applied 
Energy had developed a method to stabilize the phase voltages in ungrounded DELTA and WYE 
power systems by employing unique electromagnetic suppression techniques. These techniques 
deal with noise or control problems by prevention and suppression. There are other servo 
stabilizers available that can provide phase correction, but such stabilizers are limited to only 
providing phase correction. Applied Energy's Phaseback technology provides the phase 
correction in addition to harmonic filtering. 
Low voltage conditions caused by overload and poor power factor can simply be solved by 
connecting a power factor correction capacitor to the motor controller of the larger electric 
motors not operated by adjustable speed drive controllers. By properly sizing and connecting the 
power factor correction capacitors, the electric motors will draw about 10 percent less amps than 
they did before. This can free up system capacity or simply lighten the load on the power system. 
Lower amps equate directly to the bottom line in efficiency, power loss and system voltage 
stability. 
Harmonic noise on the phase conductors attempt to make electric motors run at many speeds at 
the same time causing heat and inefficient operation. This can also cause heat and overload on 
transformers and other inductors.  
Applied Energy is developing a patent pending ungrounded WYE system called Phaseback 
EMTVSS (electromagnetic transient voltage surge suppressor). This unit can stabilize the phase 
voltages and filter phase voltage and current harmonics. It also acts as a filter for line voltage and 
current harmonics. Applied Energy is planning to introduce the Phaseback product for grounded 
WYE power systems and also a single-phase version of the Phaseback EMTVSS for filtering 
noise and stabilizing and balancing voltages. 
In ungrounded power systems the Phaseback EMTVSS filters out harmonics, balances phase 
voltage to ground, establishes the neutral reference required by many drive control systems, 
filters out and prevents transient voltage spikes by converting noise energy from all these 
anomalies safely to heat. The EMTVSS is always online, has no solid-state components to 
Wye-Delta Connection in Power System 
 
Prepared by Tuhin Dev 
Lecturer, Shahjalal University of Science and Technology (SUST)  Page 5 
 
degrade over time, and only one is required per power transformer, not one per sensitive load. 
Electrical equipment has shorter life due to electrical spikes and noise that result in equipment 
damage. All electrical equipment connected to a power system protected by Phaseback is likely 
to have a longer life cycle. 
Conclusion 
In today's high-tech competitive business environment a power related disturbance can result in 
losses worth billions of dollars in production and could potentially result in the damage of the 
plant. With power quality comes issues such as, harmonics, transients, surges, spkies among 
others. These are issues which need to be dealt with before the equipment gets damaged. 
Multiple power quality products are available which try to suppress unwanted power quality 
relates issues. Applied Energy has developed a Phaseback EMTVSS which acts like a surge 
suppressor, harmonic filter and a voltage regulator thus providing protection from to the 
equipment and the facility from unwanted power quality issues. The Phaseback EMTVSS filters 
out harmonics and balances phase voltage to ground. It filters and prevents transient voltage 
spikes by converting noise from all these anomalies safely to heat. This is a product to look out 
for in the coming years. 
 
